Circulating MicroRNAs as Novel Potential Biomarkers for Left Ventricular Remodeling in Postinfarction Heart Failure

Circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) have been proposed as potential biomarkers for left ventricular remodeling in postinfarction heart failure (HF). However, the diagnostic reproducibility of the use of circulating miRNAs may be affected by the temporal expression of miRNAs following myocardial infarction (MI). In the current study, using a MI-induced HF rat cohort (4-, 8-, and 12-week post-MI groups), we investigated the temporal expression of plasma miRNAs during the development of left ventricular remodeling. The plasma miRNA expression profile was obtained using miRNA sequencing. The expression of candidate miRNAs in plasma and tissues was examined with real-time PCR. Target genes of candidate miRNAs were predicted using a parallel miRNA-messenger RNA expression profiling approach. The value of plasma miRNAs as biomarkers for left ventricular remodeling was evaluated in patients with postinfarction HF () and control patients with stable angina and without significant coronary lesions and HF () with real-time PCR. Although the expression levels of miR-20a-5p, miR-340-5p, and let-7i-5p were temporally regulated in plasma, myocardium, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells, the expression levels of plasma miRNAs, especially miR-20a-5p, were associated with the development of left ventricular remodeling in the postinfarction HF rat cohort. The target genes of these 3 miRNAs were associated with the mechanistic target of rapamycin, nuclear factor-κB, tumour necrosis factor, apoptosis, and p53 signaling pathways. Additionally, the plasma levels of miR-20a-5p, miR-340-5p, and let-7i-5p were significantly increased in patients with postinfarction HF. However, only the expression levels of miR-20a-5p presented significant positive correlations with left ventricular internal end diastolic dimension and left ventricular end diastolic volume. In conclusion, the expression levels of plasma miR-20a-5p were significantly associated with the degree of left ventricular dilatation, and plasma miR-20a-5p may be a potential biomarker for postinfarction left ventricular remodeling.