Prognostic Value of MicroRNAs in Patients after Myocardial Infarction: A Substudy of PRAGUE-18

Background. The evaluation of the long-term risk of major adverse cardiovascular events and cardiac death in patients after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is an established clinical process. Laboratory markers may significantly help with the risk stratification of these patients. Our objective was to find the relation of selected microRNAs to the standard markers of AMI and determine if these microRNAs can be used to identify patients at increased risk. Methods. Selected microRNAs (miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-499) were measured in a cohort of 122 patients from the PRAGUE-18 study (ticagrelor vs. prasugrel in AMI treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (pPCI)). The cohort was split into two subgroups: 116 patients who did not die (survivors) and 6 patients who died (nonsurvivors) during the 365-day period after AMI. Plasma levels of selected circulating miRNAs were then assessed in combination with high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hsTnT) and N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP). Results. miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-499 correlated positively with NT-proBNP and hsTnT 24 hours after admission and negatively with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Both miR-1 and miR-133a positively correlated with hsTnT at admission. Median relative levels of all selected miRNAs were higher in the subgroup of nonsurvivors () in comparison with survivors (), but the difference did not reach statistical significance. All patients in the nonsurvivor subgroup had miR-499 and NT-proBNP levels above the cut-off values (891.5 ng/L for NT-proBNP and 0.088 for miR-499), whereas in the survivor subgroup, only 28.4% of patients were above the cut-off values (). Conclusions. Statistically significant correlation was found between miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-499 and hsTnT, NT-proBNP, and LVEF. In addition, this analysis suggests that plasma levels of circulating miR-499 could contribute to the identification of patients at increased risk of death during the first year after AMI, especially when combined with NT-proBNP levels.