Bone Mineral Density as a Predictor of Atherogenic Indexes of Cardiovascular Disease, Especially in Nonobese Adults

Purpose. This study is aimed at determining whether bone mineral density (BMD) values are related to atherogenic indexes (AIs) and could predict the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in southern Taiwanese adults. Methods. Medical records of 3249 adults who underwent health examinations between June 2014 and February 2018 at a regional hospital in southern Taiwan were reviewed. Data collected included health history, anthropomorphic characteristics, exercise habits, diets (vegetarian or nonvegetarian), clinical laboratory results (lipid profile, systemic blood pressure (SBP), glucose level, creatinine (Cre) level, and hemoglobin (Hb) level), and bone mineral density (BMD), which were used to identify the associations of these parameters, especially BMD, with lipid profile and calculated AIs through simple and multiple linear regressions. Results. The mean age of the patients was 58.0 years, and 71.4% were male. Body mass index (BMI), SBP, glucose level, Cre level, Hb level, and all BMD values were positively correlated with triglyceride (TG) level and AIs and were negatively correlated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) level. The significant positive correlations of BMD at all the measured sites with AIs remained after adjusting for age, sex, SBP, glucose level, Cre level, Hb level, smoking, exercise habits, and vegetarian state. The expanded adjusting model for TG/HDL-C remained significant at all the BMD measured sites in nonobese men, at bilateral femoral neck and total hips in nonobese women, and at the bilateral total hips in obese women. Conclusions. AIs are predictive markers for CVD, and BMD values are predictors of AIs, especially the novel AI, i.e., TG/HDL-C ratio, in nonobese adult men and women after dividing the patients into subgroups to eliminate the effect of BMI as a confounding factor. Thus, BMD values could predict AIs of CVD, especially in nonobese adults.