Progression of Aortic Arch Calcification Is Associated with Overall and Cardiovascular Mortality in Hemodialysis

Background. Vascular calcification is common and associated with unfavorable outcomes among patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Nevertheless, little is known whether the progression of vascular calcification outweighs the baseline calcification in association with overall and cardiovascular (CV) mortality in hemodialysis (HD) patients. Methods. This study included 140 maintenance HD patients. Vascular calcification was assessed using the aortic arch calcification (AoAC) score measured from chest radiographs at the baseline and the second year of follow-up. Progression of vascular calcification (ΔAoAC) was defined as the difference between the two measurements of AoAC. The association of ΔAoAC with overall and CV mortality was evaluated using multivariate Cox regression analysis. Results. During the mean follow-up period of 5.8 years, there were 49 (35%) overall mortality and 27 (19.3%) CV mortality. High brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity was positively correlated with ΔAoAC, whereas old age was negatively correlated with ΔAoAC. In multivariate adjusted Cox analysis, increased ΔAoAC (per 1 unit), but not baseline AoAC, was significantly associated with overall mortality (HR, 1.183; 95% CI, 1.056–1.327; ) and CV mortality (HR, 1.194; 95% CI, 1.019–1.398; ). Conclusion. Progression of AoAC outperformed the baseline AoAC in association with increased risk of overall and CV mortality in HD patients. A regular follow-up of chest radiograph and AoAC score assessments are simple and cost-effective to identify the high-risk individuals of unfavorable outcomes in maintenance HD patients.
 BREAKS HEREA Trypanosoma cruzi Genome Tandem Repetitive Satellite DNA Sequence as a Molecular Marker for a LAMP Assay for Diagnosing Chagas’ Disease

Chagas’ disease is a neglected tropical disease caused by Trypanosoma cruzi which is endemic throughout Latin America and is spread by worldwide migration. Diagnosis is currently limited to serological and molecular techniques having variations regarding their sensitivity and specificity. This work was aimed at developing a new sensitive, applicable, and cost-effective molecular diagnosis technique for loop-mediated isothermal amplification-based detection of T. cruzi (Tc-LAMP). The results led to determining a highly homologous satellite repeat region (231 bp) among parasite strains as a molecular marker for diagnosing the disease. Tc-LAMP was performed correctly for detecting parasite DNA (5 fg for the CL Brener strain and 50 fg for the DM28, TcVI, and TcI strains). Assay results proved negative for DNA from 16 helminth species and 7 protozoa, including Leishmania spp. Tc-LAMP based on the highly repeated T. cruzi satellite region is thus proposed as an important alternative for diagnosing T. cruzi infection, overcoming other methods’ limitations such as their analytic capability, speed, and requiring specialized equipment or highly trained personnel. Tc-LAMP could be easily adapted for point-of-care testing in areas having limited resources.
 BREAKS HEREAssessing the Prognostic Performance of the Child-Pugh, Model for End-Stage Liver Disease, and Albumin-Bilirubin Scores in Patients with Decompensated Cirrhosis: A Large Asian Cohort from Gastroenterology Department

Background and Aim. Various methods, including the Child-Pugh score, the model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, the MELD combined with serum sodium concentration (MELD-Na) score, the integrated MELD (iMELD) score, and the albumin-bilirubin (ALBI) score, have been widely used for predicting the survival of decompensated cirrhosis (DeCi) patients. In this study, we defined and compared the prognostic value of these scores to predict mortality in DeCi patients. Methods. We performed a single-center, observational retrospective study and analyzed 456 DeCi patients who were hospitalized in the gastroenterology department. The biochemical examination results and demographic characteristics of the patients were obtained, and five scores were calculated upon admission after 24 hours. All patients were observed until death, loss to follow-up, or specific follow-up times (28 days, 90 days, and 6 months). A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to evaluate the ability of these methods to predict mortality in DeCi patients. Results. At 28 days, 90 days, and 6 months, the cumulative number of deaths was 50 (11.0%), 76 (16.6%), and 91 (19.9%), respectively. The scores were significantly higher in nonsurviving patients than in surviving patients. All scores yielded viable values in predicting 28-day, 90-day, and 6-month prognoses for DeCi patients. The areas under the ROC curve (AUROCs) of the ALBI score were higher than those of the other scores, which were only over 0.700 at 28 days. The AUROC of the MELD score was higher than that of the other scores, including the MELD-Na and iMELD scores, at 90 days and 6 months. Conclusion. All five methods (Child-Pugh score, MELD score, MELD-Na score, iMELD score, and ALBI score) provided a reliable prediction of mortality for both the short-term and long-term prognosis of patients with DeCi. The ALBI score may be particularly useful for assessing short-term outcomes, whereas the MELD score may be particularly useful for assessing long-term outcomes.
 BREAKS HEREGrowth Differentiation Factor 15 in Children with Chronic Kidney Disease and after Renal Transplantation

Growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF-15) is strongly associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD). The aim of our study was to evaluate plasma and urinary levels of GDF-15 after pediatric renal transplantation (Rtx) and in children with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and its associations to cardiovascular risk factors. In this cross-sectional study, GDF-15 was measured in plasma and urine from 53 children with a renal transplant and 83 children with CKD and related to cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, obesity, and cholesterol) and kidney function. Forty healthy children served as a control group. Plasma levels of GDF-15 (median and range) for a Tx (transplantation) cohort, CKD cohort, and healthy controls were, respectively, 865 ng/L (463-3039 ng/L), 508 ng/L (183-3279 ng/L), and 390 ng/L (306-657 ng/L). The CKD and Tx cohorts both had significantly higher GDF-15 levels than the control group (). Univariate associations between GDF-15 and hyperuricemia (), elevated triglycerides (), low HDL (), and obesity () were found. However, mGFR () and hemoglobin () were the only significant predictors of GDF-15 in an adjusted analysis. Urinary GDF-15/creatinine ratios were 448 ng/mmol (74–5013 ng/mmol) and 540 ng/mmol (5–14960 ng/mmol) in the Tx cohort and CKD cohort, respectively. In the CKD cohort, it was weakly correlated to mGFR (, ). Plasma levels of GDF-15 are elevated in children with CKD and after Rtx. The levels were not associated with traditional cardiovascular risk factors but strongly associated with renal function.
 BREAKS HEREShort-Term Prognosis Value of sST2 for an Unfavorable Outcome in Hypertensive Patients

Background. sST2 represents a useful biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of patients with heart failure, but limited data is available on its role in patients with hypertension. The aim of this study is to evaluate the short-term prognosis value of sST2 for an unfavorable outcome in hypertensive patients. Methods. This was a prospective observational study which enrolled 80 patients with hypertension, who were followed for one year. All patients underwent clinical, laboratory (including sST2), and echocardiographic assessment at baseline. The patients were grouped according to the cardiovascular (CV) events reported during the follow-up: group A (with CV events) and group B (without CV events). Results. Overall, 59 CV events were reported during the follow-up period. Compared to group B, the patients in group A had significantly higher sST2 levels, a higher number of CV risk factors, and a higher left ventricle mass. Except for the diastolic dysfunction parameters, the echocardiographic findings were similar in the two groups. Patients in group A had a lower  ratio, larger deceleration time, and increased telediastolic pressure as quantified by the  ratio than those in group B. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that sST2 and fasting plasma glucose at baseline were independent predictors for the CV events reported during the follow-up period.  were associated with poor clinical outcomes (, Kaplan-Meier analysis). Conclusions. sST2 levels were correlated with the risk of adverse CV outcomes in hypertensive patients and may represent a useful prognostic marker in these patients.
 BREAKS HEREFunctional Characterization of a Missense Variant of MLH1 Identified in Lynch Syndrome Pedigree

Lynch syndrome (LS) is the most common hereditary colorectal cancer (CRCs) inherited in an autosomal-dominant manner. Here, we reported a multigeneration Chinese family clinically diagnosed with LS according to the Amsterdam II criteria. To identify the underlying causative gene for LS in this family, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed. A germline missense variant (c.2054C>T:p.S685F) in exon 18 of MLH1 was successfully identified by WES. Sanger sequencing verified the results of WES and also confirmed the cosegregation of the MLH1 missense variant in all affected members of the family including two unaffected family members. Bioinformatic tools predicted the identified MLH1 variant as deleterious. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining showed loss of MLH1 and PMS2 protein expression. In vitro expression analysis also revealed that the identified MLH1 missense variant (c.2054C>T:p.S685F) results in reduced expression of both MLH1 and PMS2 proteins. Based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines, the missense mutation c.2054C>T in MLH1 was classified as a “pathogenic” variant. Two unaffected family members were later recommended for colonoscopy and other important cancer diagnostic inspections every 1-2 years as both were at higher risk of LS. In conclusion, our findings widen the genotypic spectrum of MLH1 mutations responsible for LS. This study increases the phenotypic spectrum of LS which will certainly help the clinicians in diagnosing LS in multigeneration families. This study also puts emphasis on the importance of genetic counselling for the benefit of asymptomatic carriers of MMR gene variants who are at higher risk of LS.
 BREAKS HERENew Insights into the Role of Tyro3, Axl, and Mer Receptors in Rheumatoid Arthritis

Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is the most common chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease involving joints. Among several pathogenic mechanisms, the impairment of homeostatic regulators of inflammation seems to be critically important to sustain persistent infiltration and activation of immune and stromal cells within the diseased synovium. Tyrosine kinase receptors Tyro3, Axl, and Mer are members of the TAM family. Upon binding their ligands Growth Arrest-Specific gene 6 (Gas6) and Protein S (ProS1), TAM receptors (TAMs) exert numerous and diverse biologic functions. Activated Axl and Mer, for instance, can negatively regulate the inflammatory cascade and mediate phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, contributing to prevent the development of autoimmunity. Thus, a role for TAMs has been hypothesized in RA. In this review, we will summarise unmet clinical needs in RA, depict the biology of TAMs and TAM ligands, focussing on their ability to regulate the immune system and inflammation cascade, and finally offer an overview of the state-of-the-art literature about the putative role of TAM axis in RA.
 BREAKS HEREA Meta-Analysis of Robotic Surgery in Endometrial Cancer: Comparison with Laparoscopy and Laparotomy

Background. The safety and effectiveness of robotic surgery are evaluated by comparing perioperative outcomes with laparoscopy and laparotomy in endometrial cancer. Method. PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane, and other databases were searched for eligible studies up to April 2019. Studies that compared robotic surgery with laparoscopy or laparotomy in surgical staging of endometrial cancer were included. The pooled odds ratio and weighted mean difference were calculated using a random-effects or a fixed-effects model to summarize the results. Results. Twenty-seven articles were ultimately included, with one randomized controlled trial and 26 observational studies. A total of 6568 patients were included. Meta-analysis showed that robotic surgery had less estimated blood loss (), blood transfusion (), intraoperative complications (), and conversion to open surgery (), and a shorter hospital stay (), but had a longer operation time () in surgical staging of endometrial cancer compared with laparoscopy. There were no significant differences in postoperative complications, the total number of lymph nodes harvested, the number of pelvic lymph nodes harvested, and the number of para-aortic lymph nodes harvested between techniques. Robotic surgery had a longer operation time (), less estimated blood loss (), blood transfusion (), and postoperative complications (), and a shorter hospital stay () compared with laparotomy. There were no significant differences in other variables between techniques. Conclusion. Robotic surgery is a safer surgical approach than laparoscopy and laparotomy in surgical staging of endometrial cancer, with less estimated blood loss, blood transfusion, and conversion, and the same number of lymph nodes harvested.
 BREAKS HEREThe Accuracy of Single MicroRNAs in Peripheral Blood to Diagnose Ovarian Cancer: An Updated Meta-Analysis

Background. Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of death of women due to cancer in the United States. Although carbohydrate antigen 125 has a moderate diagnostic utility, the phenomenon of false-positive exists. As novel effective biomarkers, some single microRNAs (miRNAs) have diagnostic values for ovarian cancer, but the results lack consistency. In order to precisely and comprehensively assess the diagnostic value of single miRNAs for ovarian cancer, a meta-analysis is performed. Methods. Articles concerning the diagnostic value of single miRNAs for ovarian cancer were searched from databases. The pooled sensitivity (SEN), specificity (SPE), positive likelihood ratio (PLR), negative likelihood ratio (NLR), and diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) with the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated. Area under curve (AUC) of the summary receiver-operating characteristic (SROC) curve was also calculated. Results. In total, 22 studies including 8 kinds of single miRNAs were enrolled in this paper (6 studies for miR-200c, 3 studies for miR-200a and miR-200b, and 2 studies for miR-205, miR-145, miR-141, miR-429, and miR-125b). For miR-200c, the pooled SEN and SPE were, respectively, 0.768 (95% CI: 0.722-0.811) and 0.680 (95% CI: 0.624-0.732); the pooled PLR and NLR were, respectively, 2.897 (95% CI: 1.787-4.698) and 0.340 (95% CI: 0.276-0.417); the pooled DOR was 8.917 (95% CI: 4.521-17.587); and AUC of SROC curve was 0.815. For miR-200a, the pooled SEN and SPE were, respectively, 0.759 (95% CI: 0.670-0.833) and 0.717 (95% CI: 0.627-0.795); the pooled PLR and NLR were, respectively, 3.129 (95% CI: 0.997-9.816) and 0.301 (95% CI: 0.207-0.437); the pooled DOR was 11.323 (95% CI: 3.493-36.711); and AUC of SROC curve was 0.857. For miR-200b, the pooled SEN and SPE were, respectively, 0.853 (95% CI: 0.776-0.912) and 0.775 (95% CI: 0.690-0.846); the pooled PLR and NLR were, respectively, 4.327 (95% CI: 0.683-27.415) and 0.225 (95% CI: 0.081-0.625); the pooled DOR was 19.678 (95% CI: 2.812-137.72); and AUC of SROC curve was 0.90. For miR-205, miR-145, miR-141, miR-429, and miR-125b, each diagnostic value should be interpreted cautiously because only two studies were included. Conclusions. miR-200c, miR-200a, and miR-200b can be useful diagnostic biomarkers for ovarian cancer. More related studies are needed for miR-205, miR-145, miR-141, miR-429, and miR-125b.
 BREAKS HEREAlterations of Several Serum Parameters Are Associated with Preeclampsia and May Be Potential Markers for the Assessment of PE Severity

The precise pathophysiological mechanisms of preeclampsia (PE) and preventative strategies remain unknown. Laboratory markers which can help in identifying PE patients from pregnant women and assessing the severity of PE during pregnancy are worthy to be explored. In this study, a retrospective case-control study was designed to assess whether the serum levels of albumin (ALB), total protein (TP), prealbumin (PA), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), D-dimer, fibrinogen (Fbg), platelet (PLT) count, mean platelet volume (MPV), and platelet distribution width (PDW) can help in assessing PE and evaluate its severity. 256 pregnant women were enrolled and classified into 3 groups: mild preeclampsia (mPE, ), severe preeclampsia (sPE, ), and healthy normotensive controls (control, ). Our result showed that the serum levels of ALP, LDH, and D-dimer were significantly higher in mild or severe PE patients compared with the healthy controls (66 (52.5-76.5) vs. 168 (141.5-201.25) vs. 182.5 (120-191.5), 152 (139.75-166.25) vs. 183.5 (163.25-307) vs. 282 (215.25-306), 1.05 (0.65-1.57) vs. 3.05 (2.25-4.08) vs. 5.65 (2.29-7.71)), while ALB, TP, and PA are lower (38 (37-42) vs. 31.5 (25.5-34.5) vs. 28.5 (24-33), 65 (63-68.25) vs. 56.5 (52-61) vs. 51.5 (49-58),  vs.  vs. ). On the other hand, compared with the mPE group, the sPE group showed significantly lower PLT count but higher level of LDH, D-dimer, and Fbg. No significant differences in MPV or PDW were found between any of the two groups. In conclusion, the above markers except for the MPV and PDW may be correlated with PE severity in this patient cohort, indicating possible values of these potential biomarkers in auxiliary diagnosis and severity assessment of PE.
 BREAKS HEREDiagnostic Value of Low-Dose 256-Slice Spiral CT Angiography, MR Angiography, and 3D-DSA in Cerebral Aneurysms

Objective. To evaluate the diagnostic value of low-dose 256-slice CT angiography (CTA), MR angiography (MRA), and three dimensional-digital subtraction angiography (3D-DSA) in cerebral aneurysms. Methods. CTA, MRA, and 3D-DSA were performed in all enrolled patients to explore the diagnostic significance of the three different examinations. Results. There were 92 aneurysms confirmed during DSA and surgery in 79 patients. The diagnostic coincidence rates of DSA, CTA, and MRA were 96.7%, 89.1%, and 86%, respectively. The diagnostic coincidence rates of CTA and MRA were lower than those of DSA. The detection rate of CTA for aneurysms less than 3 mm in diameter was higher than that of MRA. Conclusion. CTA, DSA, and MRA have their own advantages and disadvantages in the diagnosis of cerebral aneurysms. They all have the diagnostic value for aneurysms.
 BREAKS HEREFASN Protein Overexpression Indicates Poor Biochemical Recurrence-Free Survival in Prostate Cancer

Backgrounds. Fatty acid synthase (FASN) has been regarded as a prognostic marker in prostate cancer (PCa). In this study, we evaluated FASN expression at both mRNA and protein levels and assessed the association between FASN expression and prognosis in male Han Chinese with PCa treated with radical prostatectomy (RP). Methods. Expression profile and prognostic value of FASN were analyzed in tissue microarray (TMA) and data retrieved from databases including TCGA public database, GEO database, and our sequencing data with whole clinicopathological characteristics. Results. FASN expression was associated with clinical parameters and biochemical recurrence of prostate cancer. The relative expression of FASN mRNA was higher in the tumor tissue in all public databases and our sequencing data (). A similar result was seen in tissue microarray (TMA) (). Analysis of our sequencing data indicated that FASN’s relative expression was associated with tumor stage (), and FASN expression was positively associated with the Gleason score () and seminal vesicle invasion () in TMA. We found that high FASN expression was an independent predictor of shorter BCR-free survival with univariate and multivariate survival analysis (), rendering FASN an optimal prognostic biomarker in male Han Chinese with prostate cancer. Conclusions. Our study demonstrated that FASN was overexpressed at mRNA and protein levels in PCa. We found that patients with high FASN expression had a shorter BCR-free survival, showing its value as a prognostic biomarker in male Han Chinese with PCa.
 BREAKS HEREDiet Alters Serum Metabolomic Profiling in the Mouse Model of Chronic Chagas Cardiomyopathy

Chagas disease is caused by Trypanosoma cruzi which is endemic in Latin America. T. cruzi infection results in a latent infection with approximately a third of latently infected patients developing chronic Chagas cardiomyopathy (CCM). CCM is a common cause of cardiomyopathy in endemic regions and has a poor prognosis compared to other cardiomyopathies. The factors responsible for the transition from the asymptomatic indeterminate latent stage of infection to CCM are poorly understood. Our previous studies demonstrated that lipid metabolism and diet are important determinants of disease progression. In the present study, we analyzed various serum metabolomic biomarkers such as acylcarnitines, amino acids, biogenic amines, glycerophospholipids, and sphingolipids in murine models of CCM, where the mice specifically develop either left or right ventricular cardiomyopathy based on the diets fed during the indeterminate stage in a murine model of Chagas disease. Our data provide new insights into the metabolic changes that may predispose patients to CCM and biomarkers that may help predict the risk of developing cardiomyopathy from T. cruzi infection. Author Summary. Chronic Chagas cardiomyopathy (CCM) is a parasitic disease prevalent in Latin America. Currently, no effective drugs or vaccines are available to prevent or cure CCM. The factors involved in the disease severity and progression are poorly understood to design new therapeutic interventions. In order to rapidly identify Chagas patients with a higher risk to develop CCM, a new set of biomarkers specific to Chagas disease is needed. We performed serum metabolomic analyses in chronic T. cruzi-infected mice fed on different diets and identified cardiac ventricular-specific metabolite biomarkers that could define CCM severity. In this paper, we present the results of serum metabolomic analyses and discuss its correlations to the diet-induced metabolic regulations in the pathogenesis of CCM in a murine model of Chagas disease.
 BREAKS HEREADAMTS-5 Decreases in Coronary Arteries and Plasma from Patients with Coronary Artery Disease

The current study demonstrates that a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type 1 motif- (ADAMTS-) 5 is a key extracellular matrix protease and associated with cardiovascular diseases. However, the plasma ADAMTS-5 levels and relevance of coronary artery disease (CAD) remain largely unknown. This study is aimed at examining the relationship between the plasma ADAMTS-5 levels and the severity of coronary stenosis in patients with CAD. In the present study, the expression of ADAMTS-5 was analyzed in coronary artery samples and blood. The results showed that the plasma ADAMTS-5 levels were lower in the CAD group than in the control group. In addition, significantly higher matrix metalloproteinase- (MMP-) 2 and MMP-9 levels were also observed in the patients with CAD, and the ADAMTS-5 levels were negatively correlated with the MMP-2 and MMP-9 levels. Spearman’s correlation analysis showed that the Gensini score was negatively correlated with the ADAMTS-5 levels but was positively correlated with the MMP-2 and MMP-9 levels. Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) analysis revealed that ADAMTS-5, MMP-2, and MMP-9 may have a certain diagnostic value in CAD and that the combination of all three metalloproteinases had a higher diagnostic value. The findings provided a better understanding of the role of ADAMTS-5 in the diagnosis of CAD.
 BREAKS HEREThe Utility of Major Salivary Gland Ultrasonographic Parameters in the Diagnosis of Sjögren Syndrome

Objective. To investigate ultrasonographically the salivary glands and to correlate ultrasonographic parameters with focus score, serum beta-2-microglobulin, and stimulated salivary flow rate. Material and Methods. 32 patients with primary Sjögren’s syndrome (pSS) and 32 healthy controls were enrolled in this case-control study, performed in the Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, “Victor Babeș” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timișoara, Romania. All the patients and controls were examined by salivary gland ultrasonography (B-mode, color and spectral Doppler, and sonoelastography), determining the following parameters: salivary gland ultrasonography (SGUS) score, resistive index (RI) of transverse facial artery, and shear wave velocity (SWV). Serum beta-2-microglobulin and stimulated saliva amount were determined in all the patients and controls. Minor salivary gland biopsy with focus score assessment was done in pSS patients. Results. Patients with pSS presented higher SGUS score and parotid and submandibular SWV and reduced RI of transverse facial artery than controls (). In pSS patients, statistically significant correlations were identified between assessed ultrasonographic parameters and focus score, serum beta-2-microglobulin, and respective stimulated saliva flow (). Conclusions. This study highlighted statistically significant correlations between salivary gland ultrasonographic parameters and focus score, serum beta-2-microglobulin, and stimulated saliva flow.
 BREAKS HEREFavorable Response to CD34+ Cell Therapy Is Associated with a Decrease of Galectin-3 Levels in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure

Background. Galectin-3 plasma levels (gal-3) were shown to correlate with the scar burden in chronic heart failure (CHF) setting. As scar burden predicts response to stem cell therapy, we sought to explore a correlation between gal-3 and response to CD34+ cell transplantation in patients with CHF. Methods. We performed a post hoc analysis of patients, enrolled in 2 prospective trials investigating the clinical effects of CD34+ cell therapy in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICMP) and nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCMP). CD34+ cells were mobilized by G-CSF, collected via apheresis, and injected transendocardially using NOGA system. Patients were followed for 3 months and demographic, echocardiographic, and biochemical parameters and gal-3 were analyzed at baseline and at follow-up. Response to cell therapy was defined as an LVEF increase of ≥5%. Results. 61 patients were included in the analysis. The mean age of patients was 52 years and 83% were male. DCMP and ICMP were present in 69% and 31% of patients, respectively. The average serum creatinine was  μmol/L, NT-proBNP 1132 (IQR 350-2279) pg/mL, and LVEF %. Gal-3 at baseline and at 3 months did not differ significantly ( ng/mL vs.  ng/mL; ), and there were no differences in baseline gal-3 with respect to heart failure etiology ( ng/mL in ICMP vs.  ng/mL in DCMP; ). Comparing responders () to nonresponders (), we found no differences in baseline gal-3 ( ng/mL vs.  ng/mL; ). However, responders had significantly lower gal-3 at 3-month follow-up ( ng/mL vs.  ng/mL; ). Also, responders demonstrated a significant decrease in gal-3 over 3 months, while in nonresponders, an increase in gal-3 occurred ( ng/mL vs. ng/mL; ). Conclusions. In patients with chronic heart failure undergoing CD34+ cell therapy, a decrease in galectin-3 plasma levels is associated with beneficial response to this treatment modality. Further prospective data is warranted to confirm our findings and to deepen our understanding of the role of gal-3 in the field of stem cell therapy.
 BREAKS HERECirculating MicroRNAs as Novel Potential Biomarkers for Left Ventricular Remodeling in Postinfarction Heart Failure

Circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) have been proposed as potential biomarkers for left ventricular remodeling in postinfarction heart failure (HF). However, the diagnostic reproducibility of the use of circulating miRNAs may be affected by the temporal expression of miRNAs following myocardial infarction (MI). In the current study, using a MI-induced HF rat cohort (4-, 8-, and 12-week post-MI groups), we investigated the temporal expression of plasma miRNAs during the development of left ventricular remodeling. The plasma miRNA expression profile was obtained using miRNA sequencing. The expression of candidate miRNAs in plasma and tissues was examined with real-time PCR. Target genes of candidate miRNAs were predicted using a parallel miRNA-messenger RNA expression profiling approach. The value of plasma miRNAs as biomarkers for left ventricular remodeling was evaluated in patients with postinfarction HF () and control patients with stable angina and without significant coronary lesions and HF () with real-time PCR. Although the expression levels of miR-20a-5p, miR-340-5p, and let-7i-5p were temporally regulated in plasma, myocardium, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells, the expression levels of plasma miRNAs, especially miR-20a-5p, were associated with the development of left ventricular remodeling in the postinfarction HF rat cohort. The target genes of these 3 miRNAs were associated with the mechanistic target of rapamycin, nuclear factor-κB, tumour necrosis factor, apoptosis, and p53 signaling pathways. Additionally, the plasma levels of miR-20a-5p, miR-340-5p, and let-7i-5p were significantly increased in patients with postinfarction HF. However, only the expression levels of miR-20a-5p presented significant positive correlations with left ventricular internal end diastolic dimension and left ventricular end diastolic volume. In conclusion, the expression levels of plasma miR-20a-5p were significantly associated with the degree of left ventricular dilatation, and plasma miR-20a-5p may be a potential biomarker for postinfarction left ventricular remodeling.
 BREAKS HERECardiac Chagas Disease: MMPs, TIMPs, Galectins, and TGF-β as Tissue Remodelling Players

A century after the discovery of Chagas disease, studies are still needed to establish the complex pathophysiology of this disease. However, it is known that several proteins and molecules are related to the establishment of this disease, its evolution, and the appearance of its different clinical forms. Metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors, galectins, and TGF-β are involved in the process of infection and consequently the development of myocarditis, tissue remodeling, and fibrosis upon infection with Trypanosoma cruzi. Thus, considering that the heart is one of the main target organs in Chagas disease, knowledge regarding the mechanisms of action of these molecules is essential to understand how they interact and trigger local and systemic reactions and, consequently, determine whether they contribute to the development of Chagas’ heart disease. In this sense, it is believed that the inflammatory microenvironment caused by the infection alters the expression of these proteins favoring progression of the host-parasite cycle and thereby stimulating cardiac tissue remodeling mechanisms and fibrosis. The aim of this review was to gather information on metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors, galectins, and TGF-β and discuss how these molecules and their different interrelationships contribute to the development of Chagas’ heart disease.
 BREAKS HEREThe Crucial Role of CXCL8 and Its Receptors in Colorectal Liver Metastasis

CXCL8 (also known as IL-8) can produce different biological effects by binding to its receptors: CXCR1, CXCR2, and the Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines (DARC). CXCL8 and its receptors are associated with the development of various tumor types, especially colorectal cancer and its liver metastases. In addition to promoting angiogenesis, proliferation, invasion, migration, and the survival of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, CXCL8 and its receptors have also been known to induce the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of CRC cells, to help them to escape host immunosurveillance as well as to enhance resistance to anoikis, which promotes the formation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and their colonization of distant organs. In this paper, we will review the established roles of CXCL8 signaling in CRC and discuss the possible strategies of targeting CXCL8 signaling for overcoming CRC drug resistance and cancer progression, including direct targeting of CXCL8/CXCR1/2 or indirect targeting through the inhibition of CXCL8-CXCR1/2 signaling.
 BREAKS HEREUrinary Matrix Metalloproteinase-7 and Prediction of AKI Progression Post Cardiac Surgery

Aims. Early detection of patients at high risk for progressive acute kidney injury (AKI) after cardiac surgery remains a major challenge. We aim to evaluate the utility of urinary matrix metalloproteinase-7 (uMMP-7) and other reported biomarkers for predicting AKI progression during postoperative hospital stay. Methods. We conducted a prospective, multicenter cohort study in 121 adult patients with stage 1 or 2 AKI after cardiac surgery. uMMP-7 and other well-reported biomarkers (uIL-18, uNGAL, and UACR) were measured at time of AKI clinical diagnosis. The primary outcome is the progression of AKI after cardiac surgery, defined as worsening of AKI stage (stage 1 to either stage 2 or stage 3 or from stage 2 to stage 3). Results. A level of  at time of AKI diagnosis conveyed an 8-fold risk of AKI progression as compared to those with  after adjusting for clinical risk factors. The performance of uMMP-7 for predicting progressive AKI was good with an AUC of 0.80. The combination of uMMP-7 and IL-18 produces the greatest AUC for predicting progressive AKI. Addition of uMMP-7 to the clinical risk factor model significantly improved risk reclassification for AKI progression. Conclusions. uMMP-7, measured at time of AKI clinical diagnosis, is a novel biomarker for predicting the progression of AKI after cardiac surgery. Adding uMMP-7 to the clinical risk factor model may be used as a noninvasive approach to identify a subpopulation that is at high risk for progressive AKI after cardiac surgery.
 BREAKS HEREMagnetic Resonance Imaging in Pregnancy with Intrauterine Growth Restriction: A Pilot Study

Objective. Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is a major cause of late stillbirth, though not all compromised babies remain small or are considered growth restricted as pregnancy progresses. Fetal Magnetic Resonance Imaging (f-MRI) represents a second-line tool to study pregnancies with IUGR fetuses. The aim of our study was to evaluate the usefulness of f-MRI on predicting fetal growth and the offspring’s perinatal respiratory outcome. Design. All f-MRI performed between 2014 and 2016 in Siena were analysed. Pregnancies with IUGR (Study group (SG)) were recruited together with a control population (Control group (CG)), coupled for gestational age (GA) at the time of f-MRI (mean GA 31 wks). Neonatal information was collected. The f-MRI protocol consisted of T2w images. Six regions of interest (ROI) were placed as follows: 2 on the lung, 2 on the liver, and 2 on the amniotic fluid. The signal intensities (SI) of each ROI were measured. The SI lung to liver ratio (SI lung/liver) and SI lung to amniotic fluid ratio (SI lung/amniotic fluid) were obtained for each fetus. Each ratio was compared between SG and CG. Therefore, SG was divided into two subgroups: adequate and small for gestational age (AGA and SGA) newborns. All measurements were related to offspring’s perinatal respiratory outcome. Results. SI lung/liver was linearly related with GA at the time of f-MRI and with EFW. SI lung/amniotic fluid was significantly higher in SG than in CG (). In contrast, among SG, lower values of SI lung/amniotic fluid were found in the SGA compared to AGA (). The days of oxygen supply were higher in the SGA subgroup than in the AGA subgroup (). Conclusions. SI lung/liver increases with fetal lung maturation and appears to be useful to estimate intrauterine fetal growth. SI lung/amniotic fluid seems to be a reliable predictive index to distinguish the IUGR fetuses that can recover their growth from those that were born SGA. f-MRI represents a promising frontier to predict IUGR fetus outcome, thus contributing to ameliorate the perinatal management.
 BREAKS HEREPrognostic Value of MicroRNAs in Patients after Myocardial Infarction: A Substudy of PRAGUE-18

Background. The evaluation of the long-term risk of major adverse cardiovascular events and cardiac death in patients after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is an established clinical process. Laboratory markers may significantly help with the risk stratification of these patients. Our objective was to find the relation of selected microRNAs to the standard markers of AMI and determine if these microRNAs can be used to identify patients at increased risk. Methods. Selected microRNAs (miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-499) were measured in a cohort of 122 patients from the PRAGUE-18 study (ticagrelor vs. prasugrel in AMI treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (pPCI)). The cohort was split into two subgroups: 116 patients who did not die (survivors) and 6 patients who died (nonsurvivors) during the 365-day period after AMI. Plasma levels of selected circulating miRNAs were then assessed in combination with high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hsTnT) and N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP). Results. miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-499 correlated positively with NT-proBNP and hsTnT 24 hours after admission and negatively with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Both miR-1 and miR-133a positively correlated with hsTnT at admission. Median relative levels of all selected miRNAs were higher in the subgroup of nonsurvivors () in comparison with survivors (), but the difference did not reach statistical significance. All patients in the nonsurvivor subgroup had miR-499 and NT-proBNP levels above the cut-off values (891.5 ng/L for NT-proBNP and 0.088 for miR-499), whereas in the survivor subgroup, only 28.4% of patients were above the cut-off values (). Conclusions. Statistically significant correlation was found between miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-499 and hsTnT, NT-proBNP, and LVEF. In addition, this analysis suggests that plasma levels of circulating miR-499 could contribute to the identification of patients at increased risk of death during the first year after AMI, especially when combined with NT-proBNP levels.
 BREAKS HERELong Noncoding RNAs CARMN, LUCAT1, SMILR, and MALAT1 in Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm: Validation of Biomarkers in Clinical Samples

Background and Objectives. Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) is a silent disease characterised by aortic wall expansion and vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) dedifferentiation from contractile to synthetic phenotype. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) involved in VSMC phenotypic regulation could be considered as potential diagnostic indicators and therapeutic targets of TAA. In vitro studies show that lncRNAs CARMN, LUCAT1, MALAT1, and SMILR are associated with the VSMC phenotypic state. Our aim was to test if these lncRNAs are dysregulated during TAA formation in clinical patient samples. Materials and Methods. Relative expression of lncRNAs CARMN, LUCAT1, SMILR, and MALAT1 was tested in clinical aortic tissue and blood plasma samples from TAA and non-TAA patients using the qRT-PCR method. The Mann–Whitney  test was used to compare ΔCt values between the study groups. ROC curve analysis was performed to evaluate the diagnostic value of plasma lncRNAs. Results. We found significantly reduced CARMN () and LUCAT1 () expression in aortic tissue samples from TAA patients. Relative expression of MALAT1 () and SMILR () did not differ in aortic tissue between the TAA and non-TAA groups. Expression of both LUCAT1 and SMILR was significantly decreased in TAA patients’ blood plasma compared to controls ( and , respectively). However, only LUCAT1 showed the ability to discriminate aneurysmal disease in patients’ blood plasma (, , ). Conclusions. We have shown that the expression of lncRNAs CARMN and LUCAT1 is reduced in dilated aortic tissue and that the LUCAT1 and SMILR expression is lower in the blood plasma of TAA patients. Decreased LUCAT1 expression in TAA patients’ blood plasma may have diagnostic potential in discriminating patients with TAA.
 BREAKS HEREAssociation of Plasma Renalase and Left Ventricle Mass Index in Heart Failure Patients Stratified to the Category of the Ejection Fraction: A Pilot Study

Heart failure represents a growing health problem, with increasing morbidity and mortality globally. According to the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of heart failure, many biomarkers have been proposed for the timely diagnosis and prognostication of patients with heart failure, but other than natriuretic peptides, none of them has gained enough clinical significance. Renalase, a new protein derived from kidneys was demonstrated to metabolize catecholamines and to have a cardioprotective role. The aim of the study was to determine whether renalase and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) concentration could be used to differentiate heart failure patients stratified to the category of the ejection fraction and whether plasma renalase could be used as a biomarker for left ventricle hypertrophy in all subgroups of heart failure patients. We included patients diagnosed with heart failure and stratified them to the three subgroups according to the ejection fraction. Regarding echocardiographic parameters, HFmrEF had an intermediate profile in between HFrEF and HFpEF, with statistical significance in most evaluated parameters. BNP concentration was significantly different in all three subgroups (), and renalase was statistically higher in HFrEF () compared to the HFmrEF and HFpEF, where its results were similar, without statistical significance. Renalase plasma concentration was demonstrated to be highly and positively associated with left ventricle mass index in HFrEF (), as well as increased plasma concentration of BNP (). In the HFmrEF group of patients, body mass index was positively associated with LVMI (), while in the patients with HFpEF, diabetes mellitus was demonstrated to have a positive association with LVMI (). These findings suggest that renalase concentration may be measured in order to differentiate patients with reduced ejection fraction. Plasma renalase concentrations positively correlated with left ventricle hypertrophy in patients with reduced ejection fraction, being strongly associated with increased left ventricular mass index.
 BREAKS HEREVitamin D Deficiency Predicts Poor Clinical Outcomes in Heart Failure Patients Undergoing Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy

Background and Aims. Resynchronization therapy (CRT) improves mortality and induces reverse remodeling in heart failure (HF) patients with reduced ejection fraction and wide QRS. Nonetheless, some patients do not improve despite the optimal medical therapy and right indications for device implantation. Therefore, finding biomarkers suitable for identification of those patients is crucial. Vitamin D plays a classic hormonal role in the regulation of bone metabolism and also has physiological functions in wide range of nonskeletal tissues. Based on recent studies, low levels of vitamin D seem to directly contribute to pathogenesis and worsening of HF. We planned to assess the role of vitamin D levels on clinical outcomes of HF patients undergoing CRT. Methods and Results. We enrolled 136 HF patients undergoing CRT. Total plasma vitamin D levels were measured at baseline and 6 months later. Primary endpoint was 5-year all-cause mortality; secondary endpoint was lack of good clinical response, defined as less than 15% increase of left ventricular ejection fraction after six months. During follow-up, 58 patients reached the primary, and 45 patients reached the secondary endpoint. Vitamin D levels less than 24.13 ng/mL predicted 5-year mortality () and poor clinical response () after adjusting to all significant baseline predictors. Conclusion. Our study showed that vitamin D deficiency has a significant impact in heart failure patients; it is an independent predictor of lack of midterm clinical response and long-term mortality in patients undergoing CRT. Therefore, monitoring vitamin D status of heart failure patients could be of clinical significance.
 BREAKS HEREAssociation of Galectin-3 and Soluble ST2, and Their Changes, with Echocardiographic Parameters and Development of Heart Failure after ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction

Purpose. To investigate the association of galectin-3 (Gal-3) and soluble ST2 (sST2) and their follow-up changes with the development of heart failure (HF) and echocardiographic parameters of HF (ejection fraction, atrial and ventricular size, left ventricular hypertrophy, e, and E/e) in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (pPCI). Methods. A prospective, observational study, BIOSTRAT (Biomarkers for Risk Stratification After STEMI), enrolled 117 patients between October 2014 and April 2017. Gal-3 and sST2 serum collection and echocardiography were performed twice (during index hospitalization and on a control visit at one-year follow-up). The primary endpoint was HF onset at one-year follow-up. Secondary assessments included associations of biomarker concentration with echocardiographic indices of systolic and diastolic dysfunction at baseline and at one year. Results. Mean baseline concentrations of Gal-3 and sST2 (7.5 and 26.4 ng/mL, respectively) were significantly increased at one-year follow-up (8.5 ng/mL and  and 31.4 ng/mL and , respectively). Patients who reached the primary endpoint (50 patients (48%)) had significantly higher baseline concentrations of both biomarkers and a higher Gal-3 level at one year compared to patients who did not. Both Gal-3 and sST2 were predictors of the primary endpoint in univariate logistic regression analysis, but only Gal-3 remained significant in multivariate analysis. There was no clear association between both biomarkers and echocardiographic parameters. Conclusions. Baseline, but not one-year, changes of Gal-3 and sST2 concentrations may be useful for risk stratification after STEMI. However, only Gal-3 was the independent predictor of HF development at one-year observation. This trial is registered with NCT03735719.
 BREAKS HEREInflammation-Related Patterns in the Clinical Staging and Severity Assessment of Chronic Kidney Disease

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an irreversible loss of kidney function, and it represents a major global public health burden due to both its prevalence and its continuously increasing incidence. Mineral bone disorders (MBDs) constitute a hallmark of CKD, and alongside cardiovascular complications, they underlie a poor prognosis for these patients. Thus, our study focused on novel CKD biomarker patterns and their impact on the clinical staging of the disease. As a first testing approach, the relative expression levels of 105 proteins were assessed by the Proteome Profiler Cytokine Array Kit for pooled CKD stage 2–4 serum samples to establish an overall view regarding the proteins involved in CKD pathogenesis. Among the molecules that displayed significant dysregulation in the CKD stages, we further explored the involvement of Dickkopf-related protein 1 (Dkk-1), a recognised inhibitor of the Wnt signalling pathway, and its crosstalk with 1,25OH2D3 (calcitriol) as new players in renal bone and vascular disease. The serum levels of these two molecules were quantified by an ELISA (76 samples), and the results reveal decreasing circulating levels of Dkk-1 and calcitriol in advanced CKD stages, with their circulating expression showing a downward trend as the CKD develops. In the next step, we analysed the inflammation and MBD biomarkers’ expression in CKD (by xMAP array). Our results show that the molecules involved in orchestrating the inflammatory response, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), as well as the mineral biomarkers osteoprotegerin (OPG), osteocalcin (OC), osteopontin (OPN), and fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23), correlate with Dkk-1 and calcitriol, raising the possibility of them being potential useful CKD biomarkers. These results reveal the impact of different biomarker patterns in CKD staging and severity, thus opening up novel approaches to be explored in CKD clinical management.
 BREAKS HEREGas6/TAM Signaling Components as Novel Biomarkers of Liver Fibrosis

Liver fibrosis consists in the accumulation of extracellular matrix components mainly derived from activated hepatic stellate cells. This is commonly the result of chronic liver injury repair and represents an important health concern. As liver biopsy is burdened with many drawbacks, not surprisingly there is great interest to find new reliable noninvasive methods. Among the many are new potential fibrosis biomarkers under study, some of the most promising represented by the growth arrest-specific gene 6 (Gas6) serum protein and its family of tyrosine kinase receptors, namely, Tyro3, Axl, and MERTK (TAM). Gas6/TAM system (mainly, Axl and MERTK) has in fact recently emerged as an important player in the progression of liver fibrosis. This review is aimed at giving an overall perspective of the roles played by these molecules in major chronic liver diseases. The most promising findings up to date acknowledge that both Gas6 and its receptor serum levels (such as sAxl and, probably, sMERTK) have been shown to potentially allow for easy and accurate measurement of hepatic fibrosis progression, also providing indicative parameters of hepatic dysfunction. Although most of the current scientific evidence is still preliminary and there are no in vivo validation studies on large patient series, it still looks very promising to imagine a possible future prognostic role for these biomarkers in the multidimensional assessment of a liver patient. One may also speculate on a potential role for this system targeting (e.g., with small molecule inhibitors against Axl) as a therapeutic strategy for liver fibrosis management, always bearing in mind that any such therapeutic approach might face toxicity.
 BREAKS HERERatio of Early Mitral Inflow Velocity to the Global Diastolic Strain Rate and Global Left Ventricular Longitudinal Systolic Strain Predict Overall Mortality and Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events in Hemodialysis Patients

Background. The ratio of early mitral inflow velocity to the global diastolic strain rate (E/E’sr) and global longitudinal systolic strain (GLS) of the left ventricle (LV) are emerging indices of diastolic and systolic functions, respectively, for the LV. Their prognostic significance in the prediction of mortality and cardiovascular (CV) outcomes remains underexplored in hemodialysis (HD) patients. Methods. This prospective study included 190 maintenance HD patients. The E/E’sr ratio and GLS were assessed using two-dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography. The clinical outcomes included overall mortality, CV mortality, and major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE). The associations between the E/E’sr ratio, GLS, and clinical outcomes were evaluated using multivariate Cox regression analysis. The incremental values of the E/E’sr ratio and GLS in outcome prediction were assessed by  changes in Cox models. Results. Over a median follow-up period of 3.7 years, there were 35 overall deaths, 16 CV deaths, and 45 MACE. Impaired diastolic function with a higher E/E’sr ratio was associated with overall mortality (HR, 1.484; 95% CI, 1.201−1.834; ), CV mortality (HR, 1.584; 95% CI, 1.058–2.371; ), and MACE (HR, 1.205; 95% CI, 1.040−1.397; ) in multivariate adjusted Cox analysis. Worsening GLS was associated with overall mortality (HR, 1.276; 95% CI, 1.101−1.480; ), CV mortality (HR, 1.513; 95% CI, 1.088−2.104; ), and MACE (HR, 1.214; 95% CI, 1.103−1.337; ). The E/E’sr ratio and GLS had better outcome prediction than the E to early diastolic mitral annular velocity (E/E’) ratio and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Moreover, adding the E/E’sr ratio and GLS to Cox models containing relevant clinical and conventional echocardiographic parameters improved the prediction of overall mortality (), CV mortality (), and MACE (). Conclusion. The E/E’sr ratio and GLS, as emerging indices of LV diastolic and systolic functions, significantly predict mortality and CV outcomes and outperform conventional echocardiographic parameters in outcome prediction in HD patients.
 BREAKS HEREBone Mineral Density as a Predictor of Atherogenic Indexes of Cardiovascular Disease, Especially in Nonobese Adults

Purpose. This study is aimed at determining whether bone mineral density (BMD) values are related to atherogenic indexes (AIs) and could predict the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in southern Taiwanese adults. Methods. Medical records of 3249 adults who underwent health examinations between June 2014 and February 2018 at a regional hospital in southern Taiwan were reviewed. Data collected included health history, anthropomorphic characteristics, exercise habits, diets (vegetarian or nonvegetarian), clinical laboratory results (lipid profile, systemic blood pressure (SBP), glucose level, creatinine (Cre) level, and hemoglobin (Hb) level), and bone mineral density (BMD), which were used to identify the associations of these parameters, especially BMD, with lipid profile and calculated AIs through simple and multiple linear regressions. Results. The mean age of the patients was 58.0 years, and 71.4% were male. Body mass index (BMI), SBP, glucose level, Cre level, Hb level, and all BMD values were positively correlated with triglyceride (TG) level and AIs and were negatively correlated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) level. The significant positive correlations of BMD at all the measured sites with AIs remained after adjusting for age, sex, SBP, glucose level, Cre level, Hb level, smoking, exercise habits, and vegetarian state. The expanded adjusting model for TG/HDL-C remained significant at all the BMD measured sites in nonobese men, at bilateral femoral neck and total hips in nonobese women, and at the bilateral total hips in obese women. Conclusions. AIs are predictive markers for CVD, and BMD values are predictors of AIs, especially the novel AI, i.e., TG/HDL-C ratio, in nonobese adult men and women after dividing the patients into subgroups to eliminate the effect of BMI as a confounding factor. Thus, BMD values could predict AIs of CVD, especially in nonobese adults.
 BREAKS HEREProteomic Comparison of Malignant Human Germ Cell Tumor Cell Lines

Malignant germ cell tumors (GCT) are the most common malignant tumors in young men between 18 and 40 years. The correct identification of histological subtypes, in difficult cases supported by immunohistochemistry, is essential for therapeutic management. Furthermore, biomarkers may help to understand pathophysiological processes in these tumor types. Two GCT cell lines, TCam-2 with seminoma-like characteristics, and NTERA-2, an embryonal carcinoma-like cell line, were compared by a quantitative proteomic approach using high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) in combination with stable isotope labelling by amino acid in cell culture (SILAC). We were able to identify 4856 proteins and quantify the expression of 3936. 347 were significantly differentially expressed between the two cell lines. For further validation, CD81, CBX-3, PHF6, and ENSA were analyzed by western blot analysis. The results confirmed the MS results. Immunohistochemical analysis on 59 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) normal and GCT tissue samples (normal testis, GCNIS, seminomas, and embryonal carcinomas) of these proteins demonstrated the ability to distinguish different GCT subtypes, especially seminomas and embryonal carcinomas. In addition, siRNA-mediated knockdown of these proteins resulted in an antiproliferative effect in TCam-2, NTERA-2, and an additional embryonal carcinoma-like cell line, NCCIT. In summary, this study represents a proteomic resource for the discrimination of malignant germ cell tumor subtypes and the observed antiproliferative effect after knockdown of selected proteins paves the way for the identification of new potential drug targets.
 BREAKS HEREIdentification of Core Gene Biomarkers in Patients with Diabetic Cardiomyopathy

Diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a disorder of the myocardium in diabetic patients, which is one of the critical complications of diabetes giving rise to an increased mortality. However, the underlying mechanisms of DCM remain incompletely understood presently. This study was designed to screen the potential molecules and pathways implicated with DCM. GSE26887 involving 5 control individuals and 7 DCM patients was selected from the GEO database to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). DAVID was applied to perform gene ontology (GO) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was also constructed to visualize the interactions among these DEGs. To further validate significant genes and pathways, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot were performed. A total of 236 DEGs were captured, including 134 upregulated and 102 downregulated genes. GO, KEGG, and the PPI network disclosed that inflammation, immune disorders, metabolic disturbance, and mitochondrial dysfunction were significantly enriched in the development of DCM. Notably, IL6 was an upregulated hub gene with the highest connectivity degree, suggesting that it may interact with a great many molecules and pathways. Meanwhile, SOCS3 was also one of the top 15 hub genes in the PPI network. Herein, we detected the protein level of STAT3 and SOCS3 in a mouse model with DCM. Western blot results showed that the protein level of SOCS3 was significantly lower while phosphorylated-STAT3 (P-STAT3) was activated in mice with DCM. In vitro results also uncovered the similar alterations of SOCS3 and P-STAT3 in cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts induced by high glucose (HG). However, overexpression of SOCS3 could significantly reverse HG-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and collagen synthesis of cardiac fibroblasts. Taken together, our analysis unveiled potential biomarkers and molecular mechanisms in DCM, which could be helpful to the diagnosis and treatment of DCM.
 BREAKS HEREEvaluation of a Novel Missense Mutation in ABCB4 Gene Causing Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis Type 3

Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3) is a hepatic disorder occurring predominantly in childhood and is difficult to diagnose. PFIC3, being a rare autosomal recessive disease, is caused by genetic mutations in both alleles of ABCB4, resulting in the disruption of the bile secretory pathway. The identification of pathogenic effects resulting from different mutations in ABCB4 is the key to revealing the internal cause of disease. These mutations cause truncation, instability, misfolding, and impaired trafficking of the MDR3 protein. Here, we reported a girl, with a history of intrahepatic cholestasis and progressive liver cirrhosis, with an elevated gamma-glutamyltransferase level. Genetic screening via whole exome sequencing found a novel homozygous missense mutation ABCB4:c.1195G>C:p.V399L, and the patient was diagnosed with PFIC3. Various computational tools predicted the variant to be deleterious and evolutionary conserved. For functional characterization studies, plasmids, encoding ABCB4 wild-type and selected established mutant constructs, were expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK-293T) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells. In vitro expression analysis observed a reduced expression of mutant protein compared to wild-type protein. We found that ABCB4 wild type was localized at the apical canalicular membrane, while mutant p.V399L showed intracellular retention. Intracellular mistrafficking proteins usually undergo proteasomal or lysosomal degradation. We found that after treatment with proteasomal inhibitor MG132 and lysosomal inhibitor bafilomycin A1, MDR3 expression of V399L was significantly increased. A decrease in MDR3 expression of mutant V399L protein may be a result of proteasomal or lysosomal degradation. Pharmacological modulator cyclosporin A and intracellular low temperature (30°C) treatment significantly rescued both the folding defect and the active maturation of the mutant protein. Our study identified a novel pathogenic mutation which expanded the mutational spectrum of the ABCB4 gene and may contribute to understanding the molecular basis of PFIC3. Therefore, genetic screening plays a conclusive role in the diagnosis of rare heterogenic disorders like PFIC3.
 BREAKS HERETargeting mTOR in Glioblastoma: Rationale and Preclinical/Clinical Evidence

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) drives several physiologic and pathologic cellular processes and is frequently deregulated in different types of tumors, including glioblastoma (GBM). Despite recent advancements in understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in GBM biology, the survival rates of this tumor are still disappointing, primarily due to the lack of efficacious treatments. The phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)/phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT)/mTOR pathway has emerged as a crucial player in GBM development and progression. However, to date, all the attempts to target this pathway with PI3K, AKT, or mTORC1 inhibitors failed to improve the outcome of patients with GBM. Despite these discouraging results, recent evidence pointed out that the blockade of mTORC2 might provide a useful therapeutic strategy for GBM, with the potential to overcome the limitations that mTORC1 inhibitors have shown so far. In this review, we analyzed the rationale of targeting mTOR in GBM and the available preclinical and clinical evidence supporting the choice of this therapeutic approach, highlighting the different roles of mTORC1 and mTORC2 in GBM biology.
 BREAKS HERECombination of Proteasome and Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Overcomes the Impact of Gain-of-Function p53 Mutations

Mutations in the “guardian of the genome” TP53 predominate in solid tumors. In addition to loss of tumor suppressor activity, a specific subset of missense mutations confers additional oncogenic properties. These “gain-of-function” (GOF) mutations portend poor prognosis across cancer types regardless of treatment. Our objective in this study was to identify novel therapeutic opportunities to overcome the deleterious effects of GOF TP53 mutants. Using gynecologic cancer cell lines with known TP53 mutational status, we established that treatment with a proteasome inhibitor induced cell death in cells with two recurrent GOF TP53 mutations (R175H and R248Q), and addition of a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) enhanced this effect. By contrast, p53-null cancer cells were relatively resistant to the combination. Proteasome inhibition promoted apoptosis of cells with TP53 GOF mutations, potentially through induction of the unfolded protein response. In line with the reported hyperstabilization of GOF p53 protein, cells treated with HDACi exhibited reduced levels of p53 protein. Together, these data form the basis for future clinical studies examining therapeutic efficacy in a preselected patient population with GOF TP53 mutations.
 BREAKS HEREDifferential Associations for Salivary Sodium, Potassium, Calcium, and Phosphate Levels with Carotid Intima Media Thickness, Heart Rate, and Arterial Stiffness

Salivary biomarkers may offer a noninvasive and easy sampling alternative in cardiovascular risk evaluation. The aim of the present study was to establish associations of salivary potassium, sodium, calcium, and phosphate levels with the cardiovascular phenotype determined by carotid ultrasound and carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity and to identify possible covariates for these associations.  samples of nonstimulated whole buccal saliva were obtained from subjects with (; 59%) or without (; 41%) hypertension. The potassium concentrations were 10-fold higher in saliva compared with plasma, whereas sodium concentrations exhibited the reverse relation between saliva and blood. There were no significant correlations between the levels of sodium, potassium, or calcium in saliva and plasma. All salivary electrolytes, except sodium, were significantly associated with age. In age-adjusted analyses, salivary potassium was significantly associated with carotid artery intima media thickness (cIMT) and carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity, and these associations were at the limit of significance in multivariate analyses including prevalent cardiovascular disease and risk factors. Body mass index was a significant confounder for salivary potassium. Salivary phosphate was significantly associated with cIMT in the multivariate analysis. Salivary potassium, calcium, and phosphate levels were significantly associated with heart rate in the univariate age-adjusted as well as in two different multivariate models, whereas no significant associations between sodium and heart rate were observed. In conclusion, the differential association of salivary electrolytes with cardiovascular phenotypes indicates that these electrolytes should be further studied for their predictive value as noninvasive biomarkers for cardiovascular risk evaluation.
 BREAKS HEREProtein-Based Salivary Profiles as Novel Biomarkers for Oral Diseases

The Global Burden of Oral Diseases affects 3.5 billion people worldwide, representing the number of people affected by the burden of untreated dental caries, severe periodontal disease, and edentulism. Thus, much more efforts in terms of diagnostics and treatments must be provided in the fight of these outcomes. In this sense, recently, the study of saliva as biological matrix has been identified as a new landmark initiative in the search of novel and useful biomarkers to prevent and diagnose these conditions. Specifically, saliva is a rich reservoir of different proteins and peptides and accessible due to recent advances in molecular biology and specially in targeted and unbiased proteomics technologies. Nonetheless, emerging barriers are an obstacle to the study of the salivary proteome in an effective way. This review aims at giving an overall perspective of salivary biomarkers identified in several oral diseases by means of molecular biology approaches.
 BREAKS HEREApplication of Lactoferrin and α1-Antitrypsin in Gingival Retention Fluid to Diagnosis of Periodontal Disease

Objectives. Periodontal disease is prevalent and has an inflammation associated with not only oral but also systemic pathologies. The diagnosis by biomarkers is required for clinical practice on periodontal disease. The lactoferrin and α1-antitrypsin were both inflammation-related molecules. The present study investigated the relationship between the periodontal status and the two biomarkers in gingival retention fluid (GRF). Patients and Methods. In 63 subjects with periodontitis, the GRF was sampled from maxillary anterior gingiva using a microbrush for 30 seconds. The lactoferrin and α1-antitrypsin levels in GRF were measured by an enzyme-link solvent immunoassay. Periodontal status was evaluated by probing pocket depth (PD) and bleeding on probing (BOP). Results. There was a higher level of these biomarkers in saliva (median (ng/mL), lactoferrin: 3611.9, α1-antitrypsin: 4573.3) than in GRF (lactoferrin: 61.0, α1-antitrypsin: 54.7). There was a mild-to-moderate but significantly positive correlation in lactoferrin or α1-antitrypsin between GRF and saliva. There was a positively mild-to-moderate accuracy (area under the curve: 0.60–0.81) of lactoferrin or α1-antitrypsin in GRF or in saliva to distinguish the severity of periodontal status. The cutoff level (ng/mL) of lactoferrin in GRF for detecting ≥30% of PD ≥ 4 mm (moderate periodontitis) was 68.6 and for detecting ≥20% of BOP (clinically active periodontitis) was 61.2. The cutoff level (ng/mL) of α1-antitrypsin in GRF for detecting ≥30% of PD ≥ 4 mm was 54.5 and for detecting ≥20% of BOP was 35.3. Conclusions. The data can promote an application of the measurements of lactoferrin and α1-antitrypsin in GRF to clinical practice on periodontal disease.
 BREAKS HEREUsefulness of the Adipokines as Biomarkers of Ischemic Cardiac Dysfunction

Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death among both women and men, but there is still a great percentage of misdiagnosis and lack of clearly defined criteria. Advances in biomolecular science have proven the crucial role of inflammation and, more importantly, the role of adipokines in mediating all stages of coronary artery disease. It has also been suggested that regional fat deposits, more precisely from thoracic region, have a major influence on the development of coronary artery disease by creating a local proatherogenic environment. The immune system closely interacts with metabolic risk factors to initiate, promote, and further aggravate the atherosclerotic lesions on the arterial wall all with the “help” of adipokines. So nowadays, research extensively focuses on uncovering biomarkers that would provide an increased chance of detecting subclinical cardiac distress and also add a consistent value to current guideline-imposed risk criteria.
 BREAKS HEREAdipokines as Biomarkers in Health and Disease

Adipokines are important circulating factors mediating intertissue crosstalk throughout the body and thus playing a key role in maintaining endocrine homeostasis. So far, multiple associations of adipokines with widespread noncommunicable diseases, including cardiometabolic diseases, cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and fertility problems, have been identified. However, the precise mechanisms underlying empirically observed associations are still rather poorly understood, and more research must be carried out in order to make sense of and deepen the already published data.

A better understanding of associations of adipokine expression and common diseases seems warranted, and the journal set out to publish this special issue. The preparation of this special issue resulted in a series of 5 articles, submitted by researchers from Kuwait, Czech Republic, Germany, and China. All the published studies were approved by the local Ethical Committees, and the statements are included in the Method section of the respective papers.

First, T. Pavlova et al. (Czech Republic), in their work titled “Irisin Maternal Plasma and Cord Blood Levels in Mothers with Spontaneous Preterm and Term Delivery,” focused on the possible association of irisin levels—a protective exercise-induced myokine—with preterm birth and concluded that irisin levels in cord blood were significantly different between preterm and term pregnancies. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study ever to report the association of irisin cord blood levels with preterm birth.

Second, A. Koch et al. (Germany) in their work titled “Visfatin Serum Levels Predict Mortality in Critically Ill Patients” focused on the potential of visfatin to predict mortality of critically ill patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). Visfatin is an adipokine also called nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), which displays insulin-mimicking effects. The authors report that the visfatin serum concentrations were strongly associated with disease severity and organ failure, irrespectively of the possible presence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Moreover, the authors observed that visfatin levels correlated with biomarkers of renal failure, liver dysfunction, and other adipokines (e.g., resistin, leptin, and adiponectin) in their cohort. Last but not least, high visfatin levels at ICU admission were predictive of an increased mortality, both at the ICU and during a long-term follow-up of approximately two years. Such findings emphasize strongly the need for a replication study of the potential of visfatin for the prediction of organ failure and/or overall survival in ICU patients.

Lastly, three papers focused on the possible associations of specific adipokines with insulin sensitivity or T2DM with or without concomitant metabolic syndrome: (i) F. Wang et al. from China (manuscript titled “Circulating PGRN Levels Are Increased but Not Associated with Insulin Sensitivity or β-Cell Function in Chinese Obese Children”) investigated the association of progranulin with insulin sensitivity or β-cell function in a Chinese paediatric cohort, (ii) N. A. Abdella and O. A. Mojiminiyi from Kuwait (manuscript titled “Clinical Applications of Adiponectin Measurements in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Screening, Diagnosis, and Marker of Diabetes Control”) focused on adiponectin as a potential diagnostic marker for T2DM or insulin resistance, and (iii) P. Yan et al. from China (manuscript titled “Plasma Neuregulin 4 Levels Are Associated with Metabolic Syndrome in Patients Newly Diagnosed with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus”) investigated the link between neuregulin 4 and metabolic syndrome in newly diagnosed T2DM patients. Each of these works provides unique insights into the field, suggesting, respectively, that (i) progranulin is associated with higher BMI and multiple parameters of obesity in obese children, (ii) adiponectin may be useful as possible diagnostic/therapeutic markers in T2DM, and (iii) neuregulin 4 is associated with parameters of metabolic syndrome in newly diagnosed T2DM patients.

Taken together, the presented papers further emphasize the complexity of the adipokine network that likely serves as master relays for integrating the influences of environmental factors with the genetic and epigenetic makeup of every individual. All the included papers further highlight the importance of larger prospective studies as well as validation studies on different populations of patients and different ethnicities. To conclude, the presented special issue provides a collection of novel findings in the field, contributing possibly to better decision-making in the clinical practice. It should be kept in mind, however, that adipokines are part of large neuroendocrine-immune-metabolic networks, and they exert their effects through complex endocrine, paracrine, autocrine, or juxtacrine crosstalk mechanisms, which should be further investigated with system medicine approaches.
 BREAKS HEREHigh-Sensitivity Troponin T and Soluble Form of AXL as Long-Term Prognostic Biomarkers after Heart Transplantation

Antecedents. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) is a frequent complication limiting the long-term (>1 year) survival after heart transplantation (HTx). CAV is initiated by endothelial dysfunction and can lead to severe cardiovascular (CV) complications. Since CAV is often clinically silent, biomarkers could help identifying HTx patients at risk of CAV and their severe complications. Aim. Evaluate the clinical yield of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT), marker of cardiomyocyte damage, and the soluble form of AXL (sAXL), biomarker of endothelial dysfunction, to assess the prognosis of long-term cardiovascular (CV) events occurring after HTx. Methods. 96 patients were evaluated at least > 1 year after HTx. CAV was evaluated by coronary angiography or multisliced tomography, and hs-cTnT and sAXL measured 6 months before or after CAV evaluation. Patients were followed during 42 ± 15 months for a combined end point including cardiac death, angina or acute myocardial infarction, left ventricular ejection fraction < 50%, or heart failure not due to an acute rejection. Results. 51 patients (53%) presented CAV at evaluation; 21 of them had CV events. Hs-cTnT (56 ± 45 versus 20 ± 18 ng/L; ) and sAXL concentrations (98 ± 51 versus 26 ± 26 ng/L; ) were significantly higher in patients with CV events. Hs-cTnT (HR 1.03; 95% CI 1.015–1.042, ) and sAXL (HR 1.01; 95% CI 1.001–1.019, ) were independent predictors of CV events. A hs-cTnT concentration < 21 ng/L, detected by AUC ROC, predicted the absence of CV events with a predictive value of 91%; sAXL did not add more predictive value to hs-cTnT. Survival free of CV events was 92% in patients with hs-cTnT < 21 ng/L and 57% in those with hs-cTnT > 21 ng/L (). Conclusion. Hs-cTnT, but not sAXL, measured during the long-term follow-up of HTx patients appears as a helpful biomarker to identify patients at low risk of adverse CV outcomes.
 BREAKS HEREProcalcitonin (PCT) Predicts Worse Outcome in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction (HFrEF)

Introduction. Procalcitonin (PCT) is an excellent marker of sepsis but was not extensively studied in cardiology. The present study investigated PCT plasma concentration in patients with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) and its prognostic value during 24-month follow-up. Material and Methods. Study group consisted of 130 patients with HFrEF (LVEF ≤ 45%) and 32 controls. PCT level was assessed on admission in all patients. Telephone follow-up was performed every three months over a period of 2 years. Endpoints were death of all causes and readmission for HFrEF exacerbation. Results. HFrEF patients had significantly higher PCT concentration than controls (166.95 versus 22.15 pg/ml; ). Individuals with peripheral oedema had increased PCT comparing to those without oedema (217.07 versus 152.12 pg/ml; ). In ROC analysis, PCT turned out to be a valuable diagnostic marker of HFrEF (AUC 0.91; ). Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed that patients with PCT in the 4th quartile had significantly lower probability of survival than those with PCT in the 1st and 2nd quartiles. In univariate, but not multivariate, analysis, procalcitonin turned out to be a significant predictor of death during 24-month follow-up. (; 95% CI 1.000–1.003; ). Conclusions. Elevated PCT concentration may serve as another predictor of worse outcome in patients with HFrEF.
 BREAKS HEREVisfatin Serum Levels Predict Mortality in Critically Ill Patients

The adipokine visfatin, also termed pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor (PBEF), is mainly derived from adipose tissue but has been implicated in the regulation of innate immune responses. We hypothesized that visfatin could be a potential circulating biomarker in critical illness and sepsis. We therefore measured serum levels of visfatin in a cohort of 229 critically ill medical patients upon admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). In comparison to 53 healthy controls, visfatin levels were significantly elevated in medical ICU patients, especially in patients with sepsis. Visfatin serum concentrations were strongly associated with disease severity and organ failure but did not differ between patients with or without obesity or type 2 diabetes. Visfatin levels correlated with biomarkers of renal failure, liver dysfunction, and other adipokines (e.g., resistin, leptin, and adiponectin) in critically ill patients. High visfatin levels at ICU admission indicated an increased mortality, both at the ICU and during long-term follow-up of approximately two years. Our data therefore demonstrate that circulating visfatin is a valuable biomarker for risk and prognosis assessment in critically ill patients. Furthermore, visfatin seems to be involved in the pathogenesis of excessive systemic inflammation, supporting further research on visfatin as a therapeutic target.
 BREAKS HEREAdverse Cardiac Remodelling after Acute Myocardial Infarction: Old and New Biomarkers

The prevalence of heart failure (HF) due to cardiac remodelling after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) does not decrease regardless of implementation of new technologies supporting opening culprit coronary artery and solving of ischemia-relating stenosis with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Numerous studies have examined the diagnostic and prognostic potencies of circulating cardiac biomarkers in acute coronary syndrome/AMI and heart failure after AMI, and even fewer have depicted the utility of biomarkers in AMI patients undergoing primary PCI. Although complete revascularization at early period of acute coronary syndrome/AMI is an established factor for improved short-term and long-term prognosis and lowered risk of cardiovascular (CV) complications, late adverse cardiac remodelling may be a major risk factor for one-year mortality and postponded heart failure manifestation after PCI with subsequent blood flow resolving in culprit coronary artery. The aim of the review was to focus an attention on circulating biomarker as a promising tool to stratify AMI patients at high risk of poor cardiac recovery and developing HF after successful PCI. The main consideration affects biomarkers of inflammation, biomechanical myocardial stress, cardiac injury and necrosis, fibrosis, endothelial dysfunction, and vascular reparation. Clinical utilities and predictive modalities of natriuretic peptides, cardiac troponins, galectin 3, soluble suppressor tumorogenicity-2, high-sensitive C-reactive protein, growth differential factor-15, midregional proadrenomedullin, noncoding RNAs, and other biomarkers for adverse cardiac remodelling are discussed in the review.
 BREAKS HEREPretreatment Hepatitis C Virus NS5A/NS5B Resistance-Associated Substitutions in Genotype 1 Uruguayan Infected Patients

Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) infection treatment has dramatically changed with the advent of direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs). However, the efficacy of DAAs can be attenuated by the presence of resistance-associated substitutions (RASs) before and after treatment. Indeed, RASs detected in DAA treatment-naïve HCV-infected patients could be useful for clinical management and outcome prediction. Although the frequency of naturally occurring HCV NS5A and NS5B RASs has been addressed in many countries, there are only a few reports on their prevalence in the South American region. The aim of this study was to investigate the presence of RASs to NS5A and NS5B inhibitors in a DAA treatment naïve cohort of Uruguayan patients infected with chronic hepatitis C and compare them with reports from other South American countries. Here, we found that naturally occurring substitutions conferring resistance to NS5A and NS5B inhibitors were present in 8% and 19.2%, respectively, of treatment-naïve HCV genotype 1 infected patients. Importantly, the baseline substitutions in NS5A and NS5B herein identified differ from the studies previously reported in Brazil. Furthermore, Uruguayan strains subtype 1a clustered within all major world clades, showing that HCV variants currently circulating in this country are characterized by a remarkable genetic diversity.
 BREAKS HEREStrong-LAMP Assay Based on a Strongyloides spp.-Derived Partial Sequence in the 18S rRNA as Potential Biomarker for Strongyloidiasis Diagnosis in Human Urine Samples

Human strongyloidiasis a soil-transmitted infection caused by Strongyloides stercoralis is one of the most neglected amongst the so-called Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs). S. stercoralis is a nematode, which is distributed worldwide; it has been estimated that it could affect millions of people, mainly in tropical and subtropical endemic regions. The difficulties of diagnosis lead to infection rates being underreported. Asymptomatic patients have chronic infections that can lead to severe hyperinfection syndrome or disseminated strongyloidiasis in immunocompromised patients. Strongyloidiasis can easily be misdiagnosed because conventional faecal-based techniques lack of sensitivity for the morphological identification of infective larvae in faeces. None of the currently used molecular methods have used urine samples as an alternative to faecal samples for diagnosing strongyloidiasis. This study was thus aimed at comparing, for the first time, the use of a new loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) molecular assay (Strong-LAMP) to traditional methods on patients’ urine samples. Twenty-four urine samples were taken from patients included in a study involving two Spanish hospitals for strongyloidiasis screening using parasitological and serological tests. Strongyloides larvae were found in 11 patients’ faecal samples, thereby ascertaining that they had the disease. Other patients had high antibody titres but no larvae were found in their faeces. All urine samples were analysed by PCR and Strong-LAMP assay. No amplification occurred when using PCR. Strong-LAMP led to detecting S. stercoralis DNA in urine samples from patients having previously confirmed strongyloidiasis by parasitological tests and/or a suspicion of being infected by serological ones. The Strong-LAMP assay is a useful molecular tool for research regarding strongyloidiasis in human urine samples. After further validation, the Strong-LAMP assay could also be used for complementary and effective diagnosis of strongyloidiasis in a clinical setting.
 BREAKS HERERelationship between Long Noncoding RNA H19 Polymorphisms and Risk of Coronary Artery Disease in a Chinese Population: A Case-Control Study

Background/Aim. Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a major health problem that has high morbidity and mortality around the world. In recent years, long noncoding RNA H19 has been reported to affect the proliferation and apoptosis of vascular cells, which directly or indirectly results in atherosclerosis. We performed a case-control study to explore the relationship between H19 gene polymorphisms (rs2735971, rs2839698, and rs3024270) and the risk of CAD. Methods. We collected 732 samples from Liaoning Province, China, and three polymorphisms in long noncoding RNA H19 were genotyped using the KASP platform. Results. Our data showed that H19 rs2735971 and rs3024270 variant genotypes were associated with a decreased risk of CAD (rs2735971, , , ; rs3024270, , , ). No significant association with the risk of CAD was found for H19 rs2839698 polymorphism (). In haplotype analysis, H19 polymorphisms of rs2735971-rs2839698-rs3024270 A-C-C haplotype reduced the risk of CAD by 0.61-fold (, , ). In addition, we found that rs2839698 interacted with smoking (), and according to multifactor dimensionality reduction analysis, the three-factor model including H19 rs2839698-smoking-drinking was the best model for the risk of CAD (testing balanced ). Conclusion. Our study demonstrated that some genotypes of H19 rs2735971 and rs3024270 polymorphisms, as well as rs2735971-rs2839698-rs3024270 A-C-C haplotype, were associated with the risk of CAD in a Chinese population, and these genotypes have the potential to be biomarkers for predicting CAD risk. We also found that rs2735971-rs2839698-rs3024270 A-C-C may have a significantly lower risk of CAD. The recessive genetic model of rs3024270 could predict the severity of CAD.
 BREAKS HEREAssociation between lncRNA GAS5, MEG3, and PCAT-1 Polymorphisms and Cancer Risk: A Meta-Analysis

Purpose. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been widely studied, and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in lncRNAs are considered to be genetic factors that influence cancer susceptibility. The lncRNA GAS5, MEG3, and PCAT-1 polymorphisms are shown to be possibly associated with cancer risk. The aim of this meta-analysis was to systematically evaluate this association. Methods. Studies were selected from PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, Google Scholar, Cochrane Library, the Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and the Chinese Biomedical Literature Database (CBM) through inclusion and exclusion criteria. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using the random-effects model or fixed-effects model to assess the association between lncRNA polymorphisms and cancer susceptibility. Metaregression and publication bias analyses were also conducted. All analyses were performed using the Stata 12.0 software. Results. Sixteen articles (covering 13750 cases and 17194 controls) were included in this meta-analysis. A significant association between SNP rs145204276 and gastric cancer risk was observed (del vs. ins: , ; del/del vs. ins/ins+del/ins: , ; del/ins vs. ins/ins: , ). For rs16901904, a decreased cancer risk was observed in three genetic models (C vs. T: , ; CC vs. CT+TT: , ; CC vs. TT: , ). No statistical significance was found in the metaregression analysis. For all of the included SNPs, no publication bias was found in all genotype models. Conclusions. The rs145204276 SNP in lncRNA GAS5 is likely to be associated with gastric cancer risk, whereas the rs16901904 SNP in lncRNA PCAT-1 bears association with a decreased cancer risk.
 BREAKS HEREHepatic Subcapsular Flow as a Significant Diagnostic Marker for Biliary Atresia: A Meta-Analysis

Aim. Increasing evidence indicates that hepatic subcapsular flow (HSF) can serve as a noninvasive ultrasonographic marker for the early diagnosis of biliary atresia (BA). However, results regarding its diagnostic accuracy are inconsistent and inconclusive. We conducted this meta-analysis with an aim to systematically evaluate the diagnostic value of HSF in predicting BA. Methods. A comprehensive literature search of four databases was conducted to identify the eligible studies. All analyses were performed using STATA 12.0. Results. Nine studies from eight articles containing 368 patients and 469 controls were included in our meta-analysis. Briefly, the values for pooled sensitivity, specificity, positive likelihood ratio (PLR), negative likelihood ratio (NLR), diagnostic odds ratio (DOR), and area under the curve (AUC) were 0.95 (95% CI 0.88-0.98), 0.92 (95% CI 0.85-0.96), 11.6 (95% CI 6.3-21.5), 0.06 (95% CI 0.02-0.14), 201 (95% CI 59-689), and 0.98 (95% CI 0.96-0.99), respectively. Additionally, metaregression along with subgroup analysis based on various covariates revealed the potential sources of heterogeneity and the detailed diagnostic value in each subgroup. Conclusion. Our meta-analysis showed that HSF assay could provide high accuracy in predicting BA patients and non-BA individuals. However, further studies with better design and larger sample size are required to support the results of the present study.
 BREAKS HERE