Statistical analysis of metagenomics data 

 Understanding the role of the microbiome in human health and how it can be modulated is becoming increasingly relevant for preventive medicine and for the medical management of chronic diseases. The development of high-throughput sequencing technologies has boosted microbiome research through the study of microbial genomes and allowing a more precise quantification of microbiome abundances and function. Microbiome data analysis is challenging because it involves high-dimensional structured multivariate sparse data and because of its compositional nature. In this review we outline some of the procedures that are most commonly used for microbiome analysis and that are implemented in R packages. We place particular emphasis on the compositional structure of microbiome data. We describe the principles of compositional data analysis and distinguish between standard methods and those that fit into compositional data analysis.
 BREAKS HEREGNI Corpus Version 1.0: Annotated Full-Text Corpus of Genomics & Informatics to Support Biomedical Information Extraction

Genomics & Informatics (NLM title abbreviation: Genomics Inform) is the official journal of the Korea Genome Organization. Text corpus for this journal annotated with various levels of linguistic information would be a valuable resource as the process of information extraction requires syntactic, semantic, and higher levels of natural language processing. In this study, we publish our new corpus called GNI Corpus version 1.0, extracted and annotated from full texts of Genomics & Informatics, with NLTK (Natural Language ToolKit)-based text mining script. The preliminary version of the corpus could be used as a training and testing set of a system that serves a variety of functions for future biomedical text mining.
 BREAKS HEREAn Advanced Understanding of Uterine Microbial Ecology Associated with Metritis in Dairy Cows

Metritis, the inflammation of the uterus caused by polymicrobial infections, is a prevalent and costly disease to the dairy industry as it decreases milk yield, survival, and the welfare of dairy cows. Although affected cows are treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics such as ceftiofur, endometrial and ovarian function are not fully recovered, which results in subfertility and infertility. According to culture-dependent studies, uterine pathogens include Escherichia coli, Trueperella pyogenes, Fusobacterium necrophorum, and Prevotella melaninogenica. Recent studies using high-throughput sequencing observed very low relative abundance of Escherichia coli, Trueperella pyogenes, and Prevotella melaninogenica in cows with metritis. Herein, we propose that metritis is associated with a dysbiosis of the uterine microbiota, which is characterized by high abundance
 BREAKS HEREGenetic Hearing Loss and Gene Therapy

Genetic hearing loss crosses almost all the categories of hearing loss which includes the following: conductive, sensory, and neural; syndromic and nonsyndromic; congenital, progressive, and adult onset; high-frequency, low-frequency, or mixed frequency; mild or profound; and recessive, dominant, or sex-linked. Genes play a role in almost half of all cases of hearing loss but effective treatment options are very limited. Genetic hearing loss is considered to be extremely genetically heterogeneous. The advancements in genomics have been instrumental to the identification of more than 6,000 causative variants in more than 150 genes causing hearing loss. Identification of genes for hearing impairment provides an increased insight into the normal development and function of cells in the auditory system. These defective genes will ultimately be important therapeutic targets. However, the auditory system is extremely complex which requires tremendous advances in gene therapy including gene vectors, routes of administration, and therapeutic approaches. This review summarizes and discusses recent advances in elucidating the genomics of genetic hearing loss and technologies aimed at developing a gene therapy that may become a treatment option for in the near future.
 BREAKS HEREFunctional Prediction of Hypothetical Proteins from Shigella flexneri and Validation of the Predicted Models by Using ROC Curve Analysis

Shigella spp. constitutes some of the key pathogens responsible for the global burden of diarrhoeal disease. With over 164 million reported cases per annum, shigellosis accounts for 1.1 million deaths each year. Majority of these cases occur among the children of the developing nations and the emergence of multi-drug resistance Shigella strains in clinical isolates demands the development of better/new drugs against this pathogen. The genome of Shigella flexneri was extensively analyzed and found 4,362 proteins among which the functions of 674 proteins, termed as hypothetical proteins (HPs) had not been previously elucidated. Amino acid sequences of all these 674 HPs were studied and the functions of a total of 39 HPs have been assigned with high level of confidence. Here we have utilized a combination of the latest versions of databases to assign the precise function of HPs for which no experimental information is available. These HPs were found to belong to various classes of proteins such as enzymes, binding proteins, signal transducers, lipoprotein, transporters, virulence and other proteins. Evaluation of the performance of the various computational tools conducted using receiver operating characteristic curve analysis and a resoundingly high average accuracy of 93.6% were obtained. Our comprehensive analysis will help to gain greater understanding for the development of many novel potential therapeutic interventions to defeat Shigella infection.
 BREAKS HEREInsights of window-based mechanism approach to visualize composite bioData point in feature spaces

In this paper, we propose a window-based mechanism visualization approach as an alternative way to measure the seriousness of the difference among data-insights extracted from a composite biodata point. The approach is based on two components: undirected graph and Mosaab-metric space. The significant application of this approach is to visualize the segmented genome of a virus. We use Influenza and Ebola viruses as examples to demonstrate the robustness of this approach and to conduct comparisons. This approach can provide researchers with deep insights about information structures extracted from a segmented genome as a composite biodata point, and consequently, to capture the segmented genetic variations and diversity (variants) in composite data points.
 BREAKS HEREComparison of the Genetic Alterations between Primary Colorectal Cancers and Their Corresponding Patient-Derived Xenograft Tissues

Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models are useful tools for tumor biology research and testing the efficacy of candidate anticancer drugs targeting the druggable mutations identified in tumor tissue. However, it is still unknown how much of the genetic alterations identified in primary tumors are consistently detected in tumor tissues in the PDX model. In this study, we analyzed the genetic alterations of three primary colorectal cancers (CRCs) and matched xenograft tissues in PDX models using a next-generation sequencing cancer panel. Of the 17 somatic mutations identified from the three CRCs, 14 (82.4%) were consistently identified in both primary and xenograft tumors. The other three mutations identified in the primary tumor were not detected in the xenograft tumor tissue. There was no newly identified mutation in the xenograft tumor tissues. In addition to the somatic mutations, the copy number alteration profiles were also largely consistent between the primary tumor and xenograft tissue. All of these data suggest that the PDX tumor model preserves the majority of the key mutations detected in the primary tumor site. This study provides evidence that the PDX model is useful for testing targeted therapies in the clinical field and research on precision medicine.
 BREAKS HEREIdentification of ERBB Pathway-Activated Cells in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer

Intratumor heterogeneity within a single tumor mass is one of the hallmarks of malignancy and has been reported in various tumor types. The molecular characterization of intratumor heterogeneity in breast cancer is a significant challenge for effective treatment. Using single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from a public resource, an ERBB pathway activated triple-negative cell population was identified. The differential expression of three subtyping marker genes (ERBB2, ESR1, and PGR) was not changed in the bulk RNA-seq data, but the single-cell transcriptomes showed intratumor heterogeneity. This result shows that ERBB signaling is activated using an indirect route and that the molecular subtype is changed on a single-cell level. Our data propose a different view on breast cancer subtypes, clarifying much confusion in this field and contributing to precision medicine.
 BREAKS HEREResources for assigning MeSH IDs to Japanese medical terms

Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), a medical thesaurus created by the National Library of Medicine (NLM), is a useful resource for natural language processing (NLP). In this article, the current status of the Japanese version of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) is reviewed. Online investigation found that Japanese-English dictionaries, which assign MeSH information to applicable terms, but use them for NLP, were found to be difficult to access, due to license restrictions. Here, we investigate an open-source Japanese-English glossary as an alternative method for assigning MeSH IDs to Japanese terms, to obtain preliminary data for NLP proof-of-concept.
 BREAKS HEREComparison of the MGISEQ-2000 and Illumina HiSeq 4000 sequencing platforms for RNA sequencing

Currently, Illumina sequencers are the globally leading sequencing platform in the next-generation sequencing market. Recently, MGI Tech launched a series of new sequencers, including the MGISEQ-2000, which promise to deliver high-quality sequencing data faster and at lower prices than Illumina’s sequencers. In this study, we compared the performance of two major sequencers (MGISEQ-2000 and HiSeq 4000) to test whether the MGISEQ-2000 sequencer delivers high-quality sequence data as suggested. We performed RNA sequencing of four human colon cancer samples with the two platforms, and compared the sequencing quality and expression values. The data produced from the MGISEQ-2000 and HiSeq 4000 showed high concordance, with Pearson correlation coefficients ranging from 0.98 to 0.99. Various quality control (QC) analyses showed that the MGISEQ-2000 data fulfilled the required QC measures. Our study suggests that the performance of the MGISEQ-2000 is comparable to that of the HiSeq 4000 and that the MGISEQ-2000 can be a useful platform for sequencing.
 BREAKS HEREReview of statistical methods for survival analysis using genomic data

Survival analysis mainly deals with the time to event, including death, onset of disease, and bankruptcy. The common characteristic of survival analysis is that it contains “censored” data, in which the time to event cannot be completely observed, but instead represents the lower bound of the time to event. Only the occurrence of either time to event or censoring time is observed. Many traditional statistical methods have been effectively used for analyzing survival data with censored observations. However, with the development of high-throughput technologies for producing “omics” data, more advanced statistical methods, such as regularization, should be required to construct the predictive survival model with high-dimensional genomic data. Furthermore, machine learning approaches have been adapted for survival analysis, to fit nonlinear and complex interaction effects between predictors, and achieve more accurate prediction of individual survival probability. Presently, since most clinicians and medical researchers can easily assess statistical programs for analyzing survival data, a review article is helpful for understanding statistical methods used in survival analysis. We review traditional survival methods and regularization methods, with various penalty functions, for the analysis of high-dimensional genomics, and describe machine learning techniques that have been adapted to survival analysis.
 BREAKS HEREAntibacterial and Pharmacological Evaluation of Fluoroquinolones: A Chemoinformatics Approach

Fluoroquinolone (FQ) antibiotics are an important class of synthetic antibacterial agents. These are the most extensively used drugs for treating bacterial infections in the field of both human and veterinary medicine. Herein, the antibacterial and pharmacological properties of four fluoroquinolones: lomefloxacin, norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin have been studied. The objective of this study was to analyze the antibacterial characteristics of the different fluoroquinolones. Also, the pharmacological properties of the compounds including the Lipinski rule of five, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion, LD50, drug likeliness, and toxicity were evaluated. We found that among all four FQ molecules, ofloxacin showed the highest antibacterial activity through in silico assays with a strong interaction (−38.52 kJ/mol) with the antibacterial target protein (topoisomerase-II DNA gyrase enzyme). The pharmacological and pharmacokinetic analysis also showed that the compounds ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, lomefloxacin and norfloxacin have good pharmacological properties. Notably, ofloxacin was found to possess an IGC50 (concentration needed to inhibit 50% growth) value of 0.286 μg/L against the Tetrahymena pyriformis protozoa. It also tested negative for the Ames toxicity test, showing its non-carcinogenic character.
 BREAKS HEREMutation Analysis of Synthetic DNA Barcodes in a Fission Yeast Gene Deletion Library by Sanger Sequencing

Incorporation of unique barcodes into fission yeast gene deletion collections has enabled the identification of gene functions by growth fitness analysis. For fine tuning, it is important to examine barcode sequences, because mutations arise during strain construction. Out of 8,708 barcodes (4,354 strains) covering 88.5% of all 4,919 open reading frames, 7,734 barcodes (88.8%) were validated as high-fidelity to be inserted at the correct positions by Sanger sequencing. Sequence examination of the 7,734 high-fidelity barcodes revealed that 1,039 barcodes (13.4%) deviated from the original design. In total, 1,284 mutations (mutation rate of 16.6%) exist within the 1,039 mutated barcodes, which is comparable to budding yeast (18%). When the type of mutation was considered, substitutions accounted for 845 mutations (10.9%), deletions accounted for 319 mutations (4.1%), and insertions accounted for 121 mutations (1.6%). Peculiarly, the frequency of substitutions (67.6%) was unexpectedly higher than in budding yeast (~28%) and well above the predicted error of Sanger sequencing (~2%), which might have arisen during the solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis and PCR amplification of the barcodes during strain construction. When the mutation rate was analyzed by position within 20-mer barcodes using the 1,284 mutations from the 7,734 sequenced barcodes, there was no significant difference between up-tags and down-tags at a given position. The mutation frequency at a given position was similar at most positions, ranging from 0.4% (32/7,734) to 1.1% (82/7,734), except at position 1, which was highest (3.1%), as in budding yeast. Together, well-defined barcode sequences, combined with the next-generation sequencing platform, promise to make the fission yeast gene deletion library a powerful tool for understanding gene function.
 BREAKS HEREUtility of Integrated Analysis of Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacometabolomics in Early Phase Clinical Trial: A Case Study of a New Molecular Entity

In this report, we present a case study of how pharmacogenomics and pharmacometabolomics can be useful to characterize safety and pharmacokinetic profiles in early phase new drug development clinical trials. During conducting a first-in-human trial for a new molecular entity, we were able to determine the mechanism of dichotomized variability in plasma drug concentrations, which appeared closely related to adverse drug reactions (ADRs) through integrated omics analysis. The pharmacogenomics screening was performed from whole blood samples using the Affymetrix DMET (Drug-Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters) Plus microarray, and confirmation of genetic variants was performed using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Metabolomics profiling was performed from plasma samples using liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry. A GSTM1 null polymorphism was identified in pharmacogenomics test and the drug concentrations was higher in GSTM1 null subjects than GSTM1 functional subjects. The apparent drug clearance was 13-fold lower in GSTM1 null subjects than GSTM1 functional subjects (p < 0.001). By metabolomics analysis, we identified that the study drug was metabolized by cysteinylglycine conjugation in GSTM functional subjects but those not in GSTM1 null subjects. The incidence rate and the severity of ADRs were higher in the GSTM1 null subjects than the GSTM1 functional subjects. Through the integrated omics analysis, we could understand the mechanism of inter-individual variability in drug exposure and in adverse response. In conclusion, integrated multi-omics analysis can be useful for elucidating the various characteristics of new drug candidates in early phase clinical trials.
 BREAKS HEREGenome-Wide Association Studies Associated with Backfat Thickness in Landrace and Yorkshire Pigs

Although pork quality traits are important commercially, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have not well considered Landrace and Yorkshire pigs worldwide. Landrace and Yorkshire pigs are important pork-providing breeds. Although quantitative trait loci of pigs are well-developed, significant genes in GWASs of pigs in Korea must be studied. Through a GWAS using the PLINK program, study of the significant genes in Korean pigs was performed. We conducted a GWAS and surveyed the gene ontology (GO) terms associated with the backfat thickness (BF) trait of these pigs. We included the breed information (Yorkshire and Landrace pigs) as a covariate. The significant genes after false discovery rate (<0.01) correction were AFG1L, SCAI, RIMS1, and SPDEF. The major GO terms for the top 5% of genes were related to neuronal genes, cell morphogenesis and actin cytoskeleton organization. The neuronal genes were previously reported as being associated with backfat thickness. However, the genes in our results were novel, and they included ZNF280D, BAIAP2, LRTM2, GABRA5, PCDH15, HERC1, DTNBP1, SLIT2, TRAPPC9, NGFR, APBB2, RBPJ, and ABL2. These novel genes might have roles in important cellular and physiological functions related to BF accumulation. The genes related to cell morphogenesis were NOX4, MKLN1, ZNF280D, BAIAP2, DNAAF1, LRTM2, PCDH15, NGFR, RBPJ, MYH9, APBB2, DTNBP1, TRIM62, and SLIT2. The genes that belonged to actin cytoskeleton organization were MKLN1, BAIAP2, PCDH15, BCAS3, MYH9, DTNBP1, ABL2, ADD2, and SLIT2.
 BREAKS HEREMicroRNAs in Autoimmune Sjögren’s Syndrome

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small non-coding RNAs, have been implicated in various diseases and cellular functions as microregulators of gene expression. Although the history of miRNA investigation in autoimmune Sjögren’s syndrome (SjS) is fairly short, a substantial amount of data has already been accumulated. These findings clearly indicate potential clinical implications of miRNAs, such as autoantigen expression and autoantibody production, viral miRNAs regulating the calcium signaling pathway, and aberrant immune cell regulation and cytokine production. Research endeavors in the field are currently underway to select disease-specific diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers by utilizing different types of tissues or biological specimens of SjS patients. Various techniques for miRNA analysis with different stringencies have been applied, with the most recent one being next-generation sequencing. This review compiles and highlights differentially-expressed miRNAs in various samples collected from SjS patients and their potential implications in the pathogenesis of SjS. To facilitate the development of miRNA-targeted personalized therapy in the future, we urge more follow-up studies that confirm these findings and elucidate the immunopathological roles of differentially-expressed miRNAs. Furthermore, improved diagnostic criteria for the disease itself will minimize sampling errors in patient recruitment, preventing the generation of inconsistent data.
 BREAKS HEREIdentification of Viral Taxon-Specific Genes (VTSG): Application to Caliciviridae

Virus taxonomy was initially determined by clinical experiments based on phenotype. However, with the development of sequence analysis methods, genotype-based classification was also applied. With the development of genome sequence analysis technology, there is an increasing demand for virus taxonomy to be extended from in vivo and in vitro to in silico. In this study, we verified the consistency of the current International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses taxonomy using an in silico approach, aiming to identify the specific sequence for each virus. We applied this approach to norovirus in Caliciviridae, which causes 90% of gastroenteritis cases worldwide. First, based on the dogma “protein structure determines its function,” we hypothesized that the specific sequence can be identified by the specific structure. Firstly, we extracted the coding region (CDS). Secondly, the CDS protein sequences of each genus were annotated by the conserved domain database (CDD) search. Finally, the conserved domains of each genus in Caliciviridae are classified by RPS-BLAST with CDD. The analysis result is that Caliciviridae has sequences including RNA helicase in common. In case of Norovirus, Calicivirus coat protein C terminal and viral polyprotein N-terminal appears as a specific domain in Caliciviridae. It does not include in the other genera in Caliciviridae. If this method is utilized to detect specific conserved domains, it can be used as classification keywords based on protein functional structure. After determining the specific protein domains, the specific protein domain sequences would be converted to gene sequences. This sequences would be re-used one of viral bio-marks.
 BREAKS HEREA Universal Analysis Pipeline for Hybrid Capture-Based Targeted Sequencing Data with Unique Molecular Indexes

Hybrid capture-based targeted sequencing is being used increasingly for genomic variant profiling in tumor patients. Unique molecular index (UMI) technology has recently been developed and helps to increase the accuracy of variant calling by minimizing polymerase chain reaction biases and sequencing errors. However, UMI-adopted targeted sequencing data analysis is slightly different from the methods for other types of omics data, and its pipeline for variant calling is still being optimized in various study groups for their own purposes. Due to this provincial usage of tools, our group built an analysis pipeline for global application to many studies of targeted sequencing generated with different methods. First, we generated hybrid capture-based data using genomic DNA extracted from tumor tissues of colorectal cancer patients. Sequencing libraries were prepared and pooled together, and an 8-plexed capture library was processed to the enrichment step before 150-bp paired-end sequencing with Illumina HiSeq series. For the analysis, we evaluated several published tools. We focused mainly on the compatibility of the input and output of each tool. Finally, our laboratory built an analysis pipeline specialized for UMI-adopted data. Through this pipeline, we were able to estimate even on-target rates and filtered consensus reads for more accurate variant calling. These results suggest the potential of our analysis pipeline in the precise examination of the quality and efficiency of conducted experiments.
 BREAKS HEREHisCoM-GGI: Software for Hierarchical Structural Component Analysis of Gene-Gene Interactions

Gene-gene interaction (GGI) analysis is known to play an important role in explaining missing heritability. Many previous studies have already proposed software to analyze GGI, but most methods focus on a binary phenotype in a case-control design. In this study, we developed “Hierarchical structural CoMponent analysis of Gene-Gene Interactions” (HisCoM-GGI) software for GGI analysis with a continuous phenotype. The HisCoM-GGI method considers hierarchical structural relationships between genes and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), enabling both gene-level and SNP-level interaction analysis in a single model. Furthermore, this software accepts various types of genomic data and supports data management and multithreading to improve the efficiency of genome-wide association study data analysis. We expect that HisCoM-GGI software will provide advanced accessibility to researchers in genetic interaction studies and a more effective way to understand biological mechanisms of complex diseases.
 BREAKS HEREBlood transcriptome resources of chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarcticus) and gentoo (Pygoscelis papua) penguins from the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica

The chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarcticus) and gentoo (P. papua) penguins are distributed throughout Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic islands. In this study, high-quality de novo assemblies of blood transcriptomes from these penguins were generated using the Illumina MiSeq platform. A total of 22.2 and 21.8 raw reads were obtained from chinstrap and gentoo penguins, respectively. These reads were assembled using the Oases assembly platform and resulted in 26,036 and 21,854 contigs with N50 values of 929 and 933 base pairs, respectively. Functional gene annotations through pathway analyses of the Gene Ontology, EuKaryotic Orthologous Groups, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases were performed for each blood transcriptome, resulting in a similar compositional order between the two transcriptomes. Ortholog comparisons with previously published transcriptomes from the Adélie (P. adeliae) and emperor (Aptenodytes forsteri) penguins revealed that a high proportion of the four penguins’ transcriptomes had significant sequence homology. Because blood and tissues of penguins have been used to monitor pollution in Antarctica, immune parameters in blood could be important indicators for understanding the health status of penguins and other Antarctic animals. In the blood transcriptomes, KEGG analyses detected many essential genes involved in the major innate immunity pathways, which are key metabolic pathways for maintaining homeostasis against exogenous infections or toxins. Blood transcriptome studies such as this may be useful for checking the immune and health status of penguins without sacrifice.
 BREAKS HEREInsights into the signal transduction pathways of mouse lung type II cells revealed by transcription factor profiling in the transcriptome

Alveolar type II cells constitute a small fraction of the total lung cell mass. However, they play an important role in many cellular processes including trans-differentiation into type I cells as well as repair of lung injury in response to toxic chemicals and respiratory pathogens. Transcription factors are the regulatory proteins dynamically modulating DNA structure and gene expression. Transcription factor profiling in microarray datasets revealed that several members of AP1, ATF, NF-kB, and C/EBP families involved in diverse responses were expressed in mouse lung type II cells. A transcriptional factor signature consisting of Cebpa, Srebf1, Stat3, Klf5, and Elf3 was identified in lung type II cells, Sox9+ pluripotent lung stem cells as well as in mouse lung development. Identification of the transcription factor profile in mouse lung type II cells will serve as a useful resource and facilitate the integrated analysis of signal transduction pathways and specific gene targets in a variety of physiological conditions.
 BREAKS HEREAdvances in Serological Diagnosis of Taenia solium Neurocysticercosis in Korea

Cysticercosis, a parasitic disease caused by Taenia solium metacestode (TsM), has a major global public health impact in terms of disability-adjusted life years. The parasite preferentially infects subcutaneous tissue, but may invade the central nervous system, resulting in neurocysticercosis (NC). NC is an important neglected tropical disease and an emerging disease in industrialized countries due to immigration from endemic areas. The prevalence of taeniasis in Korea declined from 0.3%-12.7% during the 1970s to below 0.02% since the 2000s. A survey conducted from 1993 to 2006 revealed that the percentage of tested samples with high levels of specific anti-TsM antibody declined from 8.3% to 2.2%, suggesting the continuing occurrence of NC in Korea. Modern imaging modalities have substantially improved the diagnostic accuracy of NC, and recent advances in the molecular biochemical characterization of the TsM cyst fluid proteome also significantly strengthened NC serodiagnosis. Two glycoproteins of 150 and 120 kDa that induce strong antibody responses against sera from patients with active-stage NC have been elucidated. The 150 kDa protein showed hydrophobic-ligand binding activities and might be critically involved in the acquisition of host-derived lipid molecules. Fasciclin and endophilin B1, both of which play roles in the homeostatic functions of TsM, showed fairly high antibody responses against calcified NC cases. NC is now controllable and manageable. Further studies should focus on controlling late-onset intractable seizures and serological diagnosis of NC patients infected with few worms. This article briefly overviews diagnostic approaches and discusses current issues relating to NC serodiagnosis.
 BREAKS HERERoles of Oncogenic Long Non-coding RNAs in Cancer Development

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are classified as RNAs that are longer than 200 nucleotides and cannot be translated into protein. Several studies have demonstrated that lncRNAs are directly or indirectly involved in a variety of biological processes and in the regulation of gene expression. In addition, lncRNAs have important roles in many diseases including cancer. It has been shown that abnormal expression of lncRNAs is observed in several human solid tumors. Several studies have shown that many lncRNAs can function as oncogenes in cancer development through the induction of cell cycle progression, cell proliferation and invasion, anti-apoptosis, and metastasis. Oncogenic lncRNAs have the potential to become promising biomarkers and might be potent prognostic targets in cancer therapy. However, the biological and molecular mechanisms of lncRNA involvement in tumorigenesis have not yet been fully elucidated. This review summarizes studies on the regulatory and functional roles of oncogenic lncRNAs in the development and progression of various types of cancer.
 BREAKS HEREAssociation of mitochondrial haplogroup F with physical performance in korean population

Athletic performance is a complex multifactorial trait involving genetic and environmental factors. The heritability of an athlete status was reported to be about 70% in a twin study, and at least 155 genetic markers are known to be related with athlete status. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes essential proteins for oxidative phosphorylation, which is related to aerobic capacity. Thus, mtDNA is a candidate marker for determining physical performance. Recent studies have suggested that polymorphisms of mtDNA are associated with athlete status and/or physical performance in various populations. Therefore, we analyzed mtDNA haplogroups to assess their association with the physical performance of Korean population. The 20 mtDNA haplogroups were determined using the SNaPshot assay. Our result showed a significant association of the haplogroup F with athlete status (odds ratio, 3.04; 95% confidence interval, 1.094 to 8.464; p = 0.012). Athletes with haplogroup F (60.64 ± 3.04) also demonstrated a higher Sargent jump than athletes with other haplogroups (54.28 ± 1.23) (p = 0.041). Thus, our data imply that haplogroup F may play a crucial role in the physical performance of Korean athletes. Functional studies with larger sample sizes are necessary to further substantiate these findings.
 BREAKS HEREHisCoM-mimi: software for hierarchical structural component analysis for miRNA-mRNA integration model for binary phenotypes

To identify miRNA-mRNA interaction pairs associated with binary phenotypes, we propose a hierarchical structural component model for miRNA-mRNA integration (HisCoM-mimi). Information on known mRNA targets provided by TargetScan is used to perform HisCoM-mimi. However, multiple databases can be used to find miRNA-mRNA signatures with known biological information through different algorithms. To take these additional databases into account, we present our advanced application software for HisCoM-mimi for binary phenotypes. The proposed HisCoM-mimi supports both TargetScan and miRTarBase, which provides manually-verified information initially gathered by text-mining the literature. By integrating information from miRTarBase into HisCoM-mimi, a broad range of target information derived from the research literature can be analyzed. Another improvement of the new HisCoM-mimi approach is the inclusion of updated algorithms to provide the lasso and elastic-net penalties for users who want to fit a model with a smaller number of selected miRNAs and mRNAs. We expect that our HisCoM-mimi software will make advanced methods accessible to researchers who want to identify miRNA-mRNA interaction pairs related with binary phenotypes.
 BREAKS HEREA review of drug knowledge discovery using BioNLP and tensor or matrix decomposition

Prediction of the relations among drug and other molecular or social entities is the main knowledge discovery pattern for the purpose of drug-related knowledge discovery. Computational approaches have combined the information from different resources and levels for drug-related knowledge discovery, which provides a sophisticated comprehension of the relationship among drugs, targets, diseases, and targeted genes, at the molecular level, or relationships among drugs, usage, side effect, safety, and user preference, at a social level. In this research, previous work from the BioNLP community and matrix or tensor decomposition was reviewed, compared, and concluded, and eventually, the BioNLP open-shared task was introduced as a promising case study representing this area.
 BREAKS HEREFusionScan: accurate prediction of fusion genes from RNA-Seq data

Identification of fusion gene is of prominent importance in cancer research field because of their potential as carcinogenic drivers. RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data have been the most useful source for identification of fusion transcripts. Although a number of algorithms have been developed thus far, most programs produce too many false-positives, thus making experimental confirmation almost impossible. We still lack a reliable program that achieves high precision with reasonable recall rate. Here, we present FusionScan, a highly optimized tool for predicting fusion transcripts from RNA-Seq data. We specifically search for split reads composed of intact exons at the fusion boundaries. Using 269 known fusion cases as the reference, we have implemented various mapping and filtering strategies to remove false-positives without discarding genuine fusions. In the performance test using three cell line datasets with validated fusion cases (NCI-H660, K562, and MCF-7), FusionScan outperformed other existing programs by a considerable margin, achieving the precision and recall rates of 60% and 79%, respectively. Simulation test also demonstrated that FusionScan recovered most of true positives without producing an overwhelming number of false-positives regardless of sequencing depth and read length. The computation time was comparable to other leading tools. We also provide several curative means to help users investigate the details of fusion candidates easily. We believe that FusionScan would be a reliable, efficient and convenient program for detecting fusion transcripts that meet the requirements in the clinical and experimental community. FusionScan is freely available at http://fusionscan.ewha.ac.kr/.
 BREAKS HEREIdentification of neoantigens derived from alternative splicing and RNA modification

The acquisition of somatic mutations is the most common event in cancer. Neoantigens expressed from genes with mutations acquired during carcinogenesis can be tumor-specific. Since the immune system recognizes tumor-specific peptides, they are potential targets for personalized neoantigen-based immunotherapy. However, the discovery of druggable neoantigens remains challenging, suggesting that a deeper understanding of the mechanism of neoantigen generation and better strategies to identify them will be required to realize the promise of neoantigen-based immunotherapy. Alternative splicing and RNA editing events are emerging mechanisms leading to neoantigen production. In this review, we outline recent work involving the large-scale screening of neoantigens produced by alternative splicing and RNA editing. We also describe strategies to predict and validate neoantigens from RNA sequencing data.
 BREAKS HEREThe interaction between gut microbiome and nutrients on development of human disease through epigenetic mechanisms

Early environmental exposure is recognized as a key factor for long-term health based on the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease hypothesis. It considers that early-life nutrition is now being recognized as a major contributor that may permanently program change of organ structure and function toward the development of diseases, in which epigenetic mechanisms are involved. Recent researches indicate early-life environmental factors modulate the microbiome development and the microbiome might be mediate diet-epigenetic interaction. This review aims to define which nutrients involve microbiome development during the critical window of susceptibility to disease, and how microbiome modulation regulates epigenetic changes and influences human health and future prevention strategies.
 BREAKS HEREDirect-to-consumer genetic testing

Direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing is a controversial issue although Korean Government is considering to expand DTC genetic testing. Preventing the exaggeration and abusing of DTC genetic testing is an important task considering the early history of DTC genetic testing in Korea. And the DTC genetic testing performance or method has been rarely reported to the scientific and/or medical community and reliability of DTC genetic testing needs to be assessed. Law enforcement needs to improve these issues. Also principle of transparency needs to be applied.
 BREAKS HERERecent advances in Bayesian inference of isolation-with-migration models

Isolation-with-migration (IM) models have become popular for explaining population divergence in the presence of migrations. Bayesian methods are commonly used to estimate IM models, but they are limited to small data analysis or simple model inference. Recently three methods, IMa3, MIST, and AIM, resolved these limitations. Here, we describe the major problems addressed by these three software and compare differences among their inference methods, despite their use of the same standard likelihood function.
 BREAKS HEREThe extension of the largest generalized-eigenvalue based distance metric Dij(γ1) in arbitrary feature spaces to classify composite data points

Analyzing patterns in data points embedded in linear and non-linear feature spaces is considered as one of the common research problems among different research areas, for example: data mining, machine learning, pattern recognition, and multivariate analysis. In this paper, data points are heterogeneous sets of biosequences (composite data points). A composite data point is a set of ordinary data points (e.g., set of feature vectors). We theoretically extend the derivation of the largest generalized eigenvalue-based distance metric Dij (γ1) in any linear and non-linear feature spaces. We prove that Dij (γ1) is a metric under any linear and non-linear feature transformation function. We show the sufficiency and efficiency of using the decision rule δΞi (i.e., mean of Dij (γ1)) in classification of heterogeneous sets of biosequences compared with the decision rules minΞi and medianΞi. We analyze the impact of linear and non-linear transformation functions on classifying/clustering collections of heterogeneous sets of biosequences. The impact of the length of a sequence in a heterogeneous sequence-set generated by simulation on the classification and clustering results in linear and non-linear feature spaces is empirically shown in this paper. We propose a new concept: the limiting dispersion map of the existing clusters in heterogeneous sets of biosequences embedded in linear and nonlinear feature spaces, which is based on the limiting distribution of nucleotide compositions estimated from real data sets. Finally, the empirical conclusions and the scientific evidences are deduced from the experiments to support the theoretical side stated in this paper.
 BREAKS HEREUsing the PubAnnotation ecosystem to perform agile text mining on Genomics & Informatics: a tutorial review

The prototype version of the full-text corpus of Genomics & Informatics has recently been archived in a GitHub repository. The full-text publications of volumes 10 through 17 are also directly downloadable from PubMed Central (PMC) as XML files. During the Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon 6 (BLAH6), we experimented with converting, annotating, and updating 301 PMC full-text articles of Genomics & Informatics using PubAnnotation, a system that provides a convenient way to add PMC publications based on PMCID. Thus, this review aims to provide a tutorial overview of practicing the iterative task of named entity recognition with the PubAnnotation/PubDictionaries/TextAE ecosystem. We also describe developing a conversion tool between the Genia tagger output and the JSON format of PubAnnotation during the hackathon.
 BREAKS HEREingle-Cell Sequencing in Cancer: Recent Applications to Immunogenomics and Multi-omics Tools

Tumor heterogeneity, the cellular mosaic of multiple lineages arising from the process of clonal evolution, has continued to thwart multi-omics analyses using traditional bulk sequencing methods. The application of single-cell sequencing, in concert with existing genomics methods, has enabled high-resolution interrogation of the genome, transcriptome, epigenome, and proteome. Applied to cancers, these single-cell multi-omics methods bypass previous limitations on data resolution and have enabled a more nuanced understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of tumor progression, immune evasion, metastasis, and treatment resistance. This review details the growing number of novel single-cell multi-omics methods applied to tumors and further discusses recent discoveries emerging from these approaches, especially in regard to immunotherapy.
 BREAKS HEREDNA methylation: a cause and consequence of type 2 diabetes

DNA methylation is a relatively stable epigenetic modification that can regulate and stabilize gene expression patterns and hence establish cell identity. Because metabolic intermediates are key factors of DNA methylation and demethylation, perturbations in metabolic homeostasis can trigger alterations in cell-specific patterns of DNA methylation and contribute to disease development, including type 2 diabetes (T2D). During the past decade, genome-wide DNA methylation studies of T2D have expanded our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying T2D. This review summarizes case-control studies of the DNA methylome of T2D and discusses DNA methylation as both a cause and consequence of T2D. Therefore, DNA methylation has potential as a promising T2D biomarker that can be applied to the development of therapeutic strategies for T2D.
 BREAKS HEREWTO, an ontology for wheat traits and phenotypes in scientific publications

Phenotyping is a major issue for wheat agriculture to meet the challenges of adaptation of wheat varieties to climate change and chemical input reduction in crop. The need to improve the reuse of observations and experimental data has led to the creation of reference ontologies to standardize descriptions of phenotypes and to facilitate their comparison. The scientific literature is largely under-exploited, although extremely rich in phenotype descriptions associated with cultivars and genetic information. In this paper we propose the Wheat Trait Ontology (WTO) that is suitable for the extraction and management of scientific information from scientific papers, and its combination with data from genomic and experimental databases. We describe the principles of WTO construction and show examples of WTO use for the extraction and management of phenotype descriptions obtained from scientific documents.
 BREAKS HEREEditor’s introduction to the special issue of the 6th Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon (BLAH6)

As data science gains in importance and popularity, the need for accessing data in scientific literature is rapidly increasing. While structured databases are supposed to supply readily machine-readable data, unstructured contents, particularly scientific literature, are recognized as a biggest source of data with comprehensive details, e.g., experimental environments and actual observations.
Since the importance of scientific literature for data science has been widely recognized, several groups have invested to develop various text mining resources. While many of them are publicly available, interoperability of them remains a critical issue, hindering efficient use or reuse of them, particularly in mix with others.
The Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon (BLAH) series is annually organized to join forces of biomedical text mining for the goal to promote interoperability among text mining resources. The sixth edition of it was held in Tokyo, February 4-7, 2020, with 52 participants from 9 countries. The first day was held as a symposium to exchange and publicise the activities and ideas of the participants, and the following three days was held as a hackathon: the participants worked on implementing their ideas with collaboration with other participants.
While the main theme of the event was improving interoperability of biomedical literature mining, which include annotation datasets, tools, platforms, terminology resources, and so on, this year, “social media mining” was also explored as a special theme. Social media is recognized as a good source of raw signals on how people are thinking about what is going on in the world, which are largely missing in scientific literature. Therefore, social media mining is expected to complement literature mining.
This special issue is a collection of the reports on achievements from the hackathon, which address various issues of biomedical literature and social media mining, including document collection, automatic annotation, manual annotation, annotation platform, translation, terminology, ontology, and so on. Note that, except a few, many of the works began just before or even during the hackathon, and due to the limited time for work, they are often small-sized works, which are expected to benefit from collaboration with other participants. Readers will find that many of the articles have co-authorship with, or acknowledgment of other participants, which is a typical nature of hackathon-oriented publications.
We hope that this will be an opportunity for the readers of the journal Genomics & Informatics to get aware of the state-of-the-art activities regarding interoperability of biomedical text mining, and at the same time to observe activities of hackathons like BLAH.
 BREAKS HEREEvaluation and Interpretation of Transcriptome Data Underlying Heterogeneous Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a type of progressive lung disease, featured by airflow obstruction. Recently, a comprehensive analysis of the transcriptome in lung tissue of COPD patients was performed, but the heterogeneity of the sample was not seriously considered in characterizing the mechanistic dysregulation of COPD. Here, we established a new transcriptome analysis pipeline using a deconvolution process to reduce the heterogeneity and clearly identified that these transcriptome data originated from the mild or moderate stage of COPD patients. Differentially expressed or co-expressed genes in the protein interaction subnetworks were linked with mitochondrial dysfunction and the immune response, as expected. Computational protein localization prediction revealed that 19 proteins showing changes in subcellular localization were mostly related to mitochondria, suggesting that mislocalization of mitochondria-targeting proteins plays an important role in COPD pathology. Our extensive evaluation of COPD transcriptome data could provide guidelines for analyzing heterogeneous gene expression profiles and classifying potential candidate genes that are responsible for the pathogenesis of COPD.
 BREAKS HEREDe novo transcriptome sequencing and gene expression profiling with/without B-chromosome plants of Lilium amabile

Supernumerary B chromosomes were found in Lilium amabile (2n = 2x = 24), an endemic Korean lily that grows in the wild throughout the Korean Peninsula. The extra B chromosomes do not affect the host-plant morphology; therefore, whole transcriptome analysis was performed in 0B and 1B plants to identify differentially expressed genes. A total of 154,810 transcripts were obtained from over 10 Gbp data by de novo assembly. By mapping the raw reads to the de novo transcripts, we identified 7,852 differentially expressed genes (log2FC > |10|), in which 4,059 and 3,794 were up-and down-regulated, respectively, in 1B plants compared to 0B plants. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that various differentially expressed genes were involved in cellular processes including the cell cycle, chromosome breakage and repair, and microtubule formation; all of which may be related to the occurrence and maintenance of B chromosomes. Our data provide insight into transcriptomic changes and evolution of plant B chromosomes and deliver an informative database for future study of B chromosome transcriptomes in the Korean lily.
 BREAKS HEREA proof-of-concept study of extracting patient histories for rare/intractable diseases from social media

The amount of content on social media platforms such as Twitter is expanding rapidly. Simultaneously, the lack of patient information seriously hinders the diagnosis and treatment of rare/intractable diseases. However, these patient communities are especially active on social media. Data from social media could serve as a source of patient-centric knowledge for these diseases complementary to the information collected in clinical settings and patient registries, and may also have potential for research use. To explore this question, we attempted to extract patient-centric knowledge from social media as a task for the 3-day Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon 6 (BLAH6). We selected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis as use cases of rare and intractable diseases, respectively, and we extracted patient histories related to these health conditions from Twitter. Four diagnosed patients for each disease were selected. From the user timelines of these eight patients, we extracted tweets that might be related to health conditions. Based on our experiment, we show that our approach has considerable potential, although we identified problems that should be addressed in future attempts to mine information about rare/intractable diseases from Twitter.
 BREAKS HEREUsing the PubAnnotation ecosystem to perform agile text mining on Genomics & Informatics: a tutorial review

The prototype version of the full-text corpus of Genomics & Informatics has recently been archived in a GitHub repository. The full-text publications of volumes 10 through 17 are also directly downloadable from PubMed Central (PMC) as XML files. During the Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon 6 (BLAH6), we experimented with converting, annotating, and updating 301 PMC full-text articles of Genomics & Informatics using PubAnnotation, a system that provides a convenient way to add PMC publications based on PMCID. Thus, this review aims to provide a tutorial overview of practicing the iterative task of named entity recognition with the PubAnnotation/PubDictionaries/TextAE ecosystem. We also describe developing a conversion tool between the Genia tagger output and the JSON format of PubAnnotation during the hackathon.
 BREAKS HERESocial Media Mining Toolkit (SMMT)

There has been a dramatic increase in the popularity of utilizing social media data for research purposes within the biomedical community. In PubMed alone, there have been nearly 2,500 publication entries since 2014 that deal with analyzing social media data from Twitter and Reddit. However, the vast majority of those works do not share their code or data for replicating their studies. With minimal exceptions, the few that do, place the burden on the researcher to figure out how to fetch the data, how to best format their data, and how to create automatic and manual annotations on the acquired data. In order to address this pressing issue, we introduce the Social Media Mining Toolkit (SMMT), a suite of tools aimed to encapsulate the cumbersome details of acquiring, preprocessing, annotating and standardizing social media data. The purpose of our toolkit is for researchers to focus on answering research questions, and not the technical aspects of using social media data. By using a standard toolkit, researchers will be able to acquire, use, and release data in a consistent way that is transparent for everybody using the toolkit, hence, simplifying research reproducibility and accessibility in the social media domain.
 BREAKS HEREGenome-Based Virus Taxonomy with the ICTV Database Extension

In 1966, the International Classification of Viruses (ICNV) was established to standardize the naming of viruses. In 1975, the organization was renamed “International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV),” by which it is still known today. The primary virus classification provided by ICTV in 1971 was for viruses infecting vertebrates, which includes 19 genera, 2 families, and 24 unclassified groups. Presently, the 10th virus taxonomy has been published. However, the early classification of viruses was based on clinical results “in vivo” and “in vitro,” as well as on the shape of the Phenotype virus. Due to the development of next-generation sequencing and the accompanying bioinformatics analysis pipelines, a reconstruction of the classification system has been proposed. At a meeting held in Boston, USA between June 9-11, 2016, there was even an in-depth discussion regarding the classification of viruses using metagenomic data. One suggested activity that arose from the meeting was that viral taxonomy should be reconstructed, based on genotype and bioinformatics analysis “in silico.” This article describes our efforts to achieve this goal by construction of a web-based system and the extension of an associated database, based on ICTV taxonomy. This virus taxonomy web system was designed specifically to extend the virus taxonomy up to strain and isolation, which was then connected with the NCBI database to facilitate searches for specific viral genes; there are also links to journals provided by the EMBL RESTful API that improves accessibility for academic groups.
 BREAKS HEREUtility of Integrated Analysis of Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacometabolomics in Early Phase Clinical Trial: A Case Study of a New Molecular Entity

In this report, we present a case study of how pharmacogenomics and pharmacometabolomics can be useful to characterize safety and pharmacokinetic profiles in early phase new drug development clinical trials. During conducting a first-in-human trial for a new molecular entity, we were able to determine the mechanism of dichotomized variability in plasma drug concentrations, which appeared closely related to adverse drug reactions (ADRs) through integrated omics analysis. The pharmacogenomics screening was performed from whole blood samples using the Affymetrix DMET (Drug-Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters) Plus microarray, and confirmation of genetic variants was performed using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Metabolomics profiling was performed from plasma samples using liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry. A GSTM1 null polymorphism was identified in pharmacogenomics test and the drug concentrations was higher in GSTM1 null subjects than GSTM1 functional subjects. The apparent drug clearance was 13-fold lower in GSTM1 null subjects than GSTM1 functional subjects (p < 0.001). By metabolomics analysis, we identified that the study drug was metabolized by cysteinylglycine conjugation in GSTM functional subjects but those not in GSTM1 null subjects. The incidence rate and the severity of ADRs were higher in the GSTM1 null subjects than the GSTM1 functional subjects. Through the integrated omics analysis, we could understand the mechanism of inter-individual variability in drug exposure and in adverse response. In conclusion, integrated multi-omics analysis can be useful for elucidating the various characteristics of new drug candidates in early phase clinical trials.
 BREAKS HERECirculating HOTAIR LncRNA Is Potentially Up-regulated in Coronary Artery Disease

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the leading causes of death and disability all around the world. Recent studies have revealed that aberrantly regulated long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) as one of the main classes of cellular transcript plays a key regulatory role in transcriptional and epigenetic pathways. Recent reports have demonstrated that circulating lncRNAs in the blood can be potential biomarkers for CAD. HOTAIR is one of the most cited lncRNAs with a critical role in the initiation and progression of the gene expression regulation. Recent research on the role of the HOTAIR in cardiovascular disease lays the basis for the development of new studies considering this lncRNA as a potential biomarker and therapeutic target in CAD. In this study, we aimed to compare the expression of HOTAIR lncRNA in the blood samples of patients with CAD and control samples. The expression level was examined by semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction technique. Our data shows that expression of HOTAIR is up-regulated in blood samples of patients with CAD.
 BREAKS HEREDeep learning for stage prediction in neuroblastoma using gene expression data

Neuroblastoma is a major cause of cancer death in early childhood, and its timely and correct diagnosis is critical. Gene expression datasets have recently been considered as a powerful tool for cancer diagnosis and subtype classification. However, no attempts have yet been made to apply deep learning using gene expression to neuroblastoma classification, although deep learning has been applied to cancer diagnosis using image data. Taking the International Neuroblastoma Staging System stages as multiple classes, we designed a deep neural network using the gene expression patterns and stages of neuroblastoma patients. Despite a small patient population (n = 280), stage 1 and 4 patients were well distinguished. If it is possible to replicate this approach in a larger population, deep learning could play an important role in neuroblastoma staging.
 BREAKS HEREChoosing preferable labels for the Japanese translation of the Human Phenotype Ontology

The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) is the de facto standard ontology to describe human phenotypes in detail, and it is actively used, particularly in the field of rare disease diagnoses. For clinicians who are not fluent in English, the HPO has been translated into many languages, and there have been four initiatives to develop Japanese translations. At the Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon 6 (BLAH6), a rule-based approach was attempted to determine the preferable Japanese translation for each HPO term among the candidates developed by the four approaches. The relationship between the HPO and Mammalian Phenotype translations was also investigated, with the eventual goal of harmonizing the two translations to facilitate phenotype-based comparisons of species in Japanese through cross-species phenotype matching. In order to deal with the increase in the number of HPO terms and the need for manual curation, it would be useful to have a dictionary containing word-by-word correspondences and fixed translation phrases for English word order. These considerations seem applicable to HPO localization into other languages.
 BREAKS HEREMutation Analysis of Synthetic DNA Barcodes in a Fission Yeast Gene Deletion Library by Sanger Sequencing

Incorporation of unique barcodes into fission yeast gene deletion collections has enabled the identification of gene functions by growth fitness analysis. For fine tuning, it is important to examine barcode sequences, because mutations arise during strain construction. Out of 8,708 barcodes (4,354 strains) covering 88.5% of all 4,919 open reading frames, 7,734 barcodes (88.8%) were validated as high-fidelity to be inserted at the correct positions by Sanger sequencing. Sequence examination of the 7,734 high-fidelity barcodes revealed that 1,039 barcodes (13.4%) deviated from the original design. In total, 1,284 mutations (mutation rate of 16.6%) exist within the 1,039 mutated barcodes, which is comparable to budding yeast (18%). When the type of mutation was considered, substitutions accounted for 845 mutations (10.9%), deletions accounted for 319 mutations (4.1%), and insertions accounted for 121 mutations (1.6%). Peculiarly, the frequency of substitutions (67.6%) was unexpectedly higher than in budding yeast (~28%) and well above the predicted error of Sanger sequencing (~2%), which might have arisen during the solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis and PCR amplification of the barcodes during strain construction. When the mutation rate was analyzed by position within 20-mer barcodes using the 1,284 mutations from the 7,734 sequenced barcodes, there was no significant difference between up-tags and down-tags at a given position. The mutation frequency at a given position was similar at most positions, ranging from 0.4% (32/7,734) to 1.1% (82/7,734), except at position 1, which was highest (3.1%), as in budding yeast. Together, well-defined barcode sequences, combined with the next-generation sequencing platform, promise to make the fission yeast gene deletion library a powerful tool for understanding gene function.
 BREAKS HEREIdentification of ERBB Pathway-Activated Cells in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer

Intratumor heterogeneity within a single tumor mass is one of the hallmarks of malignancy and has been reported in various tumor types. The molecular characterization of intratumor heterogeneity in breast cancer is a significant challenge for effective treatment. Using single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from a public resource, an ERBB pathway activated triple-negative cell population was identified. The differential expression of three subtyping marker genes (ERBB2, ESR1, and PGR) was not changed in the bulk RNA-seq data, but the single-cell transcriptomes showed intratumor heterogeneity. This result shows that ERBB signaling is activated using an indirect route and that the molecular subtype is changed on a single-cell level. Our data propose a different view on breast cancer subtypes, clarifying much confusion in this field and contributing to precision medicine.
 BREAKS HEREIntegration of the PubAnnotation ecosystem in the development of a web-based search tool for alternative methods

Finding publications that propose alternative methods to animal experiments is an important but time-consuming task since researchers need to perform various queries to literature databases and screen many articles to assess two important aspects: the relevance of the article to the research question, and whether the article’s proposed approach qualifies to being an alternative method. We are currently developing a Web application to support finding alternative methods to animal experiments. The current (under development) version of the application utilizes external tools and resources for document processing, and relies on the PubAnnotation ecosystem for annotation querying, annotation storage, dictionary-based tagging of cell lines, and annotation visualization. Currently, our two PubAnnotation repositories for discourse elements contain annotations for more than 110k PubMed documents. Further, we created an annotator for cell lines that contain more than 196k terms from Cellosaurus. Finally, we are experimenting with TextAE for annotation visualization and for user feedback.
 BREAKS HEREExtending TextAE for annotation of non-contiguous entities

Named entity recognition tools are used to identify mentions of biomedical entities in free text and are essential components of high-quality information retrieval and extraction systems. Without good entity recognition, methods will mislabel searched text and will miss important information or identify spurious text that will frustrate users. Most tools do not capture non-contiguous entities which are separate spans of text that together refer to an entity, e.g., the entity “type 1 diabetes” in the phrase “type 1 and type 2 diabetes.” This type is commonly found in biomedical texts, especially in lists, where multiple biomedical entities are named in shortened form to avoid repeating words. Most text annotation systems, that enable users to view and edit entity annotations, do not support non-contiguous entities. Therefore, experts cannot even visualize non-contiguous entities, let alone annotate them to build valuable datasets for machine learning methods. To combat this problem and as part of the BLAH6 hackathon, we extended the TextAE platform to allow visualization and annotation of non-contiguous entities. This enables users to add new subspans to existing entities by selecting additional text. We integrate this new functionality with TextAE’s existing editing functionality to allow easy changes to entity annotation and editing of relation annotations involving non-contiguous entities, with importing and exporting to the PubAnnotation format. Finally, we roughly quantify the problem across the entire accessible biomedical literature to highlight that there are a substantial number of non-contiguous entities that appear in lists that would be missed by most text mining systems.
 BREAKS HEREAdvances in Serological Diagnosis of Taenia solium Neurocysticercosis in Korea

Cysticercosis, a parasitic disease caused by Taenia solium metacestode (TsM), has a major global public health impact in terms of disability-adjusted life years. The parasite preferentially infects subcutaneous tissue, but may invade the central nervous system, resulting in neurocysticercosis (NC). NC is an important neglected tropical disease and an emerging disease in industrialized countries due to immigration from endemic areas. The prevalence of taeniasis in Korea declined from 0.3%-12.7% during the 1970s to below 0.02% since the 2000s. A survey conducted from 1993 to 2006 revealed that the percentage of tested samples with high levels of specific anti-TsM antibody declined from 8.3% to 2.2%, suggesting the continuing occurrence of NC in Korea. Modern imaging modalities have substantially improved the diagnostic accuracy of NC, and recent advances in the molecular biochemical characterization of the TsM cyst fluid proteome also significantly strengthened NC serodiagnosis. Two glycoproteins of 150 and 120 kDa that induce strong antibody responses against sera from patients with active-stage NC have been elucidated. The 150 kDa protein showed hydrophobic-ligand binding activities and might be critically involved in the acquisition of host-derived lipid molecules. Fasciclin and endophilin B1, both of which play roles in the homeostatic functions of TsM, showed fairly high antibody responses against calcified NC cases. NC is now controllable and manageable. Further studies should focus on controlling late-onset intractable seizures and serological diagnosis of NC patients infected with few worms. This article briefly overviews diagnostic approaches and discusses current issues relating to NC serodiagnosis.
 BREAKS HEREFully connecting the Observational Health Data Science and Informatics (OHDSI) initiative with the world of linked open data

The usage of controlled biomedical vocabularies is the cornerstone that enables seamless interoperability when using a common data model across multiple data sites. The Observational Health Data Science and Informatics (OHDSI) initiative combines over 100 controlled vocabularies into its own. However, the OHDSI vocabulary is limited in the sense that it combines multiple terminologies and does not provide a direct way to link them outside of their own self-contained scope. This issue makes the tasks of enriching feature sets by using external resources extremely difficult. In order to address these shortcomings, we have created a linked data version of the OHDSI vocabulary, connecting it with already established linked resources like bioportal, bio2rdf, etc. with the ultimate purpose of enabling the interoperability of resources previously foreign to the OHDSI universe.
 BREAKS HEREImproving accessibility and distinction between negative results in biomedical relation extraction

Accessible negative results are relevant for researchers and clinicians not only to limit their search space but also to prevent the costly re-exploration of research hypotheses. However, most biomedical relation extraction datasets do not seek to distinguish between a false and a negative relation among two biomedical entities. Furthermore, datasets created using distant supervision techniques also have some false negative relations that constitute undocumented/unknown relations (missing from a knowledge base). We propose to improve the distinction between these concepts, by revising a subset of the relations marked as false on the phenotype-gene relations corpus and give the first steps to automatically distinguish between the false (F), negative (N), and unknown (U) results. Our work resulted in a sample of 127 manually annotated FNU relations and a weighted-F1 of 0.5609 for their automatic distinction. This work was developed during the 6th Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon (BLAH6).
 BREAKS HEREEvaluation of 16S rRNA Databases for Taxonomic Assignments Using a Mock Community

Taxonomic identification is fundamental to all microbiology studies. Particularly in metagenomics, which identifies the composition of microorganisms using thousands of sequences, its importance is even greater. Identification is inevitably affected by the choice of database. This study was conducted to evaluate the accuracy of three widely used 16S databases—Greengenes, Silva, and EzBioCloud—and to suggest basic guidelines for selecting reference databases. Using public mock community data, each database was used to assign taxonomy and to test its accuracy. We show that EzBioCloud performs well compared with other existing databases.
 BREAKS HEREEFMDR-Fast: An Application of Empirical Fuzzy Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction for Fast Execution

Gene-gene interaction is a key factor for explaining missing heritability. Many methods have been proposed to identify gene-gene interactions. Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) is a well-known method for the detection of gene-gene interactions by reduction from genotypes of single-nucleotide polymorphism combinations to a binary variable with a value of high risk or low risk. This method has been widely expanded to own a specific objective. Among those expansions, fuzzy-MDR uses the fuzzy set theory for the membership of high risk or low risk and increases the detection rates of gene-gene interactions. Fuzzy-MDR is expanded by a maximum likelihood estimator as a new membership function in empirical fuzzy MDR (EFMDR). However, EFMDR is relatively slow, because it is implemented by R script language. Therefore, in this study, we implemented EFMDR using RCPP (c++ package) for faster executions. Our implementation for faster EFMDR, called EMMDR-Fast, is about 800 times faster than EFMDR written by R script only.
 BREAKS HERESystem-Wide Expression and Function of Olfactory Receptors in Mammals

Olfactory receptors (ORs) in mammals are generally considered to function as chemosensors in the olfactory organs of animals. They are membrane proteins that traverse the cytoplasmic membrane seven times and work generally by coupling to heterotrimeric G protein. The OR is a G protein‒coupled receptor that binds the guanine nucleotide-binding Gαolf subunit and the Gβγ dimer to recognize a wide spectrum of organic compounds in accordance with its cognate ligand. Mammalian ORs were originally identified from the olfactory epithelium of rat. However, it has been recently reported that the expression of ORs is not limited to the olfactory organ. In recent decades, they have been found to be expressed in diverse organs or tissues and even tumors in mammals. In this review, the expression and expected function of olfactory receptors that exist throughout an organism’s system are discussed.
 BREAKS HEREIdentification of LEF1 as a Susceptibility Locus for Kawasaki Disease in Patients Younger than 6 Months of Age

Kawasaki disease (KD) is an acute febrile vasculitis predominately affecting infants and children. The dominant incidence age of KD is from 6 months to 5 years of age, and the incidence is unusual in those younger than 6 months and older than 5 years of age. We tried to identify genetic variants specifically associated with KD in patients younger than 6 months or older than 5 years of age. We performed an age-stratified genome-wide association study using the Illumina HumanOmni1-Quad BeadChip data (296 cases vs. 1,000 controls) and a replication study (1,360 cases vs. 3,553 controls) in the Korean population. Among 26 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) tested in replication study, only a rare nonsynonymous SNP (rs4365796: c.1106C＞T, p.Thr369Met) in the lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1 (LEF1) gene was very significantly associated with KD in patients younger than 6 months of age (odds ratio [OR], 3.07; pcombined = 1.10 × 10-5), whereas no association of the same SNP was observed in any other age group of KD patients. The same SNP (rs4365796) in the LEF1 gene showed the same direction of risk effect in Japanese KD patients younger than 6 months of age, although the effect was not statistically significant (OR, 1.42; p = 0.397). This result indicates that the LEF1 gene may play an important role as a susceptibility gene specifically affecting KD patients younger than 6 months of age.
 BREAKS HERE